Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Barozzi: or, The Venetian sorceress: a romance of the sixteenth century
BAROZZI.
CHAPTER I. The Assassins. " J^PAREher! oh, spare her! I implore thee f* in fi antic accents cried the aged Ferrand. " Accursed viBains! wouldst thou imbrue thy hands in the blood of innocence? What is our crime? Who is your employer? Horrible assassins! for such indeed you are, or why do I be¬ hold your stiletto raised against the pure vol, l b bosom
bosom of Rosalina? If 'tis only plunder which induces you to this rashness, take our property, fire our cottage, or raze it to the ground; but spare, oh, spare my child!" " Thy pleading is in vain, old man!" exclaimed one ofthe ruffians, whose man¬ ner bespoke him the superior; " 'tis the life of Rosalina we seek; she has offend¬ ed by a crime so great, that it can only be expiated by her death" " Her death!" said the wretched pa¬ rent. " Oh, Heavenly Powers! has Fer¬ rand St. Almo watched his child with parental fondness, reared her in the pale of rigid duty, and taught her the practice of every virtue, to hear it said she me¬ rits death f Oh, thou miscreant, 'tis false! Her life has ever been pure and unsul- Ued; free from stain as frozen snows upon the
at tlie Alpine cliffs—See! she revives* Oh, give her to my arms, and you shall re¬ ceive an old man's blessing. My Rosa¬ Una ------" He rushed to clasp her in his embrace, but Avas restrained by the bravo tliat had before addressed him, Avho, putting forth Ins arm, said, %% Hold, Ferrand! I will make one proposal. Your daughter is recovering from the savoou into whicii iJie Avas throAvn by our first appearance; if you will freely coinent to part Avith her, mid consign her to my charge, I promise faithfully to spare her life; but should vou dare to resist, she shall sink beneath the dagger of my comrade Da¬ rano, a\1io Aviuts only for -my voice to ex¬ ecute our orders/' ** Coldblooded villain!" exclaimed Ferrand, gazing fhmtkally on his daugh- b 2 ter,
ter, who till now had remained senseless in the arms of the last-mentioned ruf¬ fian, « thinkst thou I will trust to thy word—part with my child, and give her to thee, an assassin! No! sooner will w r e both perish!" ** Then be it so," cried the other: " comrade, you know your duty; drag hence the girl; and thou, old man, at thy peril beware; for if thou darest to follow, or by the slightest noise give alarm, that moment shall be your last," He now motioned Darano to the door, who instantly proceeded, bearing in his arms the almost-inanimate form of the lovely peasant, who, by this movement felt aroused from her stupor, with strength till then unknown, and a heart¬ rending shriek, extricated herself from the ruffian's grasp, and rushed into the embrace
embrace of her aged father, who strove in vain to secure the precious prize which he had uoav regained to lose for ever. " Part them!" cried the enraged Rol¬ don. " Ferrand, quit thy hold, or this moment is thy last!" " Murderer, fulfil thy threat," return¬ ed St. Almo, " and let me perish in the embrace of my child P* " Take then thv desire, obstinate old dotard 1" cried the ruffian, and instantly plunged a poniard into the breast of the miserable father, who, sinking to the ground, murmured the name of his Ro¬ salina, and expired. The latter stood in mute despair; no tear moistened her cheek, no sigh con¬ vulsed her bosom; but with her starting eyes fixed upon the bleeding corse of her martyred parent, she seemed dead to the r 3 sense
sense of every object except the dreadful one upon which she gazed. To have beheld this scene would have rent a heart of stone; even something like pity shot across that of Roldon, and (for the first time in his life) he felt a degree of horror at the sight of the en¬ sanguined stream whieh flowed with pur¬ ple tide upon the floor of the humble dwelling; but instantly recovering him¬ self from what he thought pusillanimous, once more bade Darano dr<?g forth his victim, who instantly complied, and lio* salina, without resistance, and seemingly unconscious of their proceeding, suffered herself to be borne from the spot, with her eyes fixed on the ground, as if the body of her slaughtered father still mi t her distracted sight, Roldon then advanced towards a tree, to
to which their horns Avere fiistened. and unloosing theni, with the assistance of Darano, they raised their senseless \ic- tim upon the ablest, and quickly mount¬ ing themselves, set off with all possible speed through the forest. Tliey had not rode more than a league, ere the clouds became suddenly overcast with darkness; the IioIIoav bla**t in dis¬ mal sounds howled among the trees; no rav of light AAas Aisible, save at interAals the red lightnings via id flash, ay Inch AAas folloAved in quick succession by heiuy peals of thunder, that rolled dreadfully along the concave of the heavens, at¬ tended by such swelling torrents of rain, that it appeared as if the Avorld Avas go¬ ing to sulllr a uniAersal deluge. The ruffian** grew alarmed, and the guih-stnick Roldon. in a tone of tremu- Vi 4 Ions
Ious weakness, declared he had never witnessed any tempest half so dreadful— ** *Tis as if the threatened day of judg¬ ment had arrived!" said he, tremblingly. "True," replied the hardened Darano, *' and that is a sad job for him who has the blood of Ferrand still reeking on his dagger's print." " Silence, villain T cried Roldon, ap¬ proaching in a threatening posture; "dare you moralize—you, the most confiimed bravo in all Italy f " Put up thy weapon," said the other, coolly; "thinkst thou I was moralizing? not I indeed; I know better than that truly; 'tis not a tempest can intimidate Darano, or frighten him into morality; no, no, all my fear is, that we shall not be able to pass the mountains, and ford tbe river, which must of course have o'erswelled
o'erswelled its Umits by this drenching rain. What then wiH become of us? It is utterly impossible we can proceed with our charge by daylight; and now, Rol, as onr noble employer desired us to stab the lady, why did you prefer kitting the okl mm\ ? —Ah, I perceive your mo¬ tive of morality; it is only extended to vouth and beauty; for certainly this lit- tie insensible I have in my arms is a foast for an emperor. Ah, Roldon, you have a most exceUent taste." * % Siknee, fool!" cried his enraged com¬ rade; fc * 'tAA r as indeed that beauty of whicii thou speakest that induced me to spare her,but not from the idea which you sus¬ pect—no, no; 'tAias from other motives; for I thought at sight of her, our lord might not only be pleased at our saving her, but even treble our reward. You b 3 remember
remember hoAv much he gave to us for procuring the fisherman's little daughter. who was no more in comparison to this beauty than port is to Burgundy." " Oh, I understand you perfectly/' an- sweV od Darano; " it Avas a most excel¬ lent thought of yours truly ; but I can¬ not possibly conceive what great dislike our lord can have to a peasant girl, who can never have done him any injury." " He has his reasons," returned the other, " or he Avould never have sent us this long journey; but of tbat enough. Let us consider Iioav avc shall cross the mountains before daylight; for should we be seen, the sight of that girl, whose clothes are stained with blood, doubtless will create suspicion, and of course be¬ tray us." He checked his horse, and ex¬ claimed, « What shall we do, Darano?" * Do r
" Do!" said the other,." Avhy, suppose we^ ------" At that instant a loud haUoo sounded on the left, which in a moment Avas an- sAvered by a v r oiee on the right. " We are undone," said Roldon; "how shall Ave proeeed ?" " Why, do you dismount," answered Darano, "and lead my horse and your OAvn to yon clump of trees, Avhieh the lightning enables us to discern; there o o ** let us couch tiU those umveleome intru¬ ders haA T e departed." " I like your counsel well," returned the other, dismounting as he spoke; " but be careful and hold the girl fast; fbr it is so A r cry slippery, our horses can scarcely keep their foothold; and should Ave lose a prize so dearly earned, it vrill be devUish hard." bC "It
" It wiU indeed," repUed his comrade, " therefore proceed Avith caution, but with as much haste as the dangerous state of the ground wiU permit." They had not moved far, ere voices again broke the solemn silence whicii succeeded each dismal clap of thunder. Torches now gleamed in different direc¬ tions through the forest's maze. Darano aUghted, and wrapping RosaUna in a large loquelaure, whicli he took off him¬ self, they sat doivn, hoping to escape un¬ noticed by the persons they had heard. Ere they had remained long in this situation, a rustling amidst the trees, and sound of footsteps, proved their wishes abortive. Roldon started up, and drawing forth his stiletto, exclaimed, " Speak! Who art thou that thus intrudes upon our shelter?
shelter? If Avith a design of plunder, you are deceived, for we have not much to lose." " I am no robber," said the unknoAvn, stiU approaching; " I am the friend to aU men. Having been till a late hour hunting in the forest, my horse stum¬ bled, and threAV me with great violence to the earth, and it gre/w quite dark ere I was sufficiently recovered from the fall so as to be able to explore my way, Avhich I have now entirely lost; but my people, I suppose, are iioav in quest of me, for within the last few minutes I have several times heard the sound of voices." " So have we too," said the other; u but as we are no part of your retinue, and rather suspicious of injury, must de¬ sire you to be gone." "Well,"
** Well," replied the youthful hunter, ** you are the most uncourteous persons to a benighted stmngor 1 ever heard of." " Perhaps we are, signor; but take our •advice, or else it may prove worse," The stranger was t»bout *° depart, when a loud shriek arrested his atten¬ tion. " What is that ?" interrogated he. At the same moment Rosalina, who had been laid a few paces distant, amonirst the trees, nished forth, and east- ing herself prostrate at his feet in a heart-rending voice, cried, "Save me! oil, save me!" A vivid fcVh of lightning whieh shot stress the atmosphere enabled hnn t*> discern the form and features of the h i veiy suppl iant whose appearanee stn.ek liim lx>th with liorror and sur- prise. She had on a loose white linen robe,
rol>e, bespotted with blood; ivhilo her long chesnut ringlets spread on her shoulder?, dishevelled and dripping witii the storm, which had fallen upon hei*de¬ fenceless head; her delicate white lumds Avere upraised, in the attitude of earnest supplication, Avhile her starting eyes spoke Aohunes of eloquence to the soul of the astounded Rosalva. Darano sprung forward to seize her, Avhen the sound of hallooing, close to the spot, accompanied by the glare of nume¬ rous torches, caused the rutnans to think more of their safety in escaping hy flri-ht, than making any resistance. Instantly throwing the reins across the necks of their horses, they vaulted into tlieir saddles, and with all the speed the situa¬ tion of the place would alloAV, Avere out of sight in a moment, aud almost Avith¬ out
out the knowledge of Rosalva, who thought of nothing but the fair peasant, whoni he had caught safely in his arms. His people now eame up, who ex¬ pressed their great joy in finding him unhurt, and by their looks seemed asto¬ nished at the sight of his companion, of whom he inquired the means by which she had fallen into the hands of those whom the arrival of his attendants had put to flight ? Rosalina cast her eyes upon her dress; the ensanguined robe caused the dread¬ ful circumstance to visit her recollection; and with the words, " Oh my father!" bursting from her lips, she sunk insen¬ sible into the arms of her deliverer, who from this exclamation, which was corro¬ borated by her appearance, concluded that her parent had been murdered by thosr
those ruffians, and that she was most truly wretched. He instantly bade his servants prepare a kind of litter, and carefuUy convey her to the castle, whic 1 stood at some distance from the borders of the forest.
CHAT'-
CHAPTER II.
The Assig nation. Rosalva Barozzi Avas descended from the noble Venetian fannly of that name. He avos Avild and impetuous. The III- indged fondness Avhich his flither had e\er evinced, spoiled a disposition natur¬ ally excellent. He had been indulged in his boyhood even to a fault, the con¬ sequence of Avhich AAas, that all his ac¬ tions Avere precipitate and unruly. He always foUoAved the bent of his inclina¬ tions, without reflecting even for a mo¬ ment
ment whether such desires Avere proper or improper. His graceful form and comely countenance rendered him the unhTTsal favourite of the fair signoras who frequented the Piazzo di St. Marco, the Ridotto, and other places of public entertainment. 'Twas on the last evening of the car- ni\-al, Avhen having left the Pallazzo di Barozzi, (heated with Avine, and ready to engage in any enteiprize, hoAA 7 soeA T er dangerous), that he perceived, in earnest conversation, at the corner of St. Loren- >;a, tAvo men, seemingly strangers, at least to him; they Avalked to and fro for some time, at a tolerable pace, after¬ wards made a stand ; then one of them, energetically mising his hand, claimed the attention of the other, who seemed to
to listen eagerly to what he advanced. They now turned baek, and were pro¬ ceeding towards the place from whence Rosalva first beheld them, who, with Ms usual impetuosity, resolved if possible to become a sharer in the secret. Sliding into the opening of the building, he slipped behind one of the pillars, and one which he knew they might probably pass. His conjecture was right, for they paused for a few moments exactly against it; when he that had before seemed to be the principal speaker, thus addressed himself to his companion—" I tell you there is no danger, Pisano; is it not the last day of the carnival?—will not every body be engaged by their own pleasures, without attending to those of others? By the mass! I think the lady has a good
good taste certainly. Flodiardo Is as comely a youth as signora need Avish to look on/' " Ah, that he is," said the other; " but how is it to be ordered ?" " Why you, Pisano, can engage a gon¬ dola to be at the foot ofthe Rialto; v r >u * */ can manage to row, whieh Avitt prevent the possibility of discovery, so you must pav a satisfactory sum to the gondolier, and take Flodiardo doAvn the river your¬ self." " Well, but how am I to know the signor Avhen I see him, if he is masqued?" inquired the other. " Know him!" said the first, at the same time moving onwards, (and Rcsalva [ cautiously foUowing to listen, at the ha- r zard of exposing himself, so anxious was he to come to the bottom of this strange adventure),
adventure), " Avhy he is to stand there ready, and be liubited in blue. You are to ask him the Avay to St. EuphemiaV, as if you Avere a stranger; and if he, in¬ stead of informing vou, ansAvers Olivia, you may be certain that you arc right/' " Well, and the exact time is to be—*' ** The hour of vt spcrs," ansAvered the first. *' Xoav haste, and leave inc to set¬ tle the other affair, for the execution of which I think 1 merit two-thirds of the reward.'' " I\ Y ot you. indeed/' retorted Pisano; * 4 I Iiad as soon engage in one as the other; thrrefore half ihe reAvard, or I declare off." " Well, Avell, tlien you shall have it." grumbled his comrade, t% though mine U by fur the most dangerous." " Not at all. Should you be pursued, yuu
you may easily seek refuge in some ho¬ ly house." " You need not tell me Iioav to act, Pisano," answered the first, pettishly. " Well, well, good-bye! Ill haste to prepare the gordola." They separated, and Rosalva, who, to .avoid being seen, had stepped behind a buttress, on their parting came forward, and mentally exclaimed, "Here's a pretty business! an intrigue and assassination * Xoav Avould I Avagc-r my lire a Avoman is at the bottom of both. Olivia! XUxd ! a good thought * Bravo, Rosalva! I will pass myself on this sham gondolier for this favoured Flodiardo. Hold! ivouM it not be more praiseworthy to prove :-t the murder? But that's impossible; i knoAv not Avhen it is to be perpetrated, or even where. I am alone, the people .n
aU amusing themselves in >St. Mark's Place, and I dare say Avould not break in upon the pleasures to pursue the bravo, even though I could point him out; therefore I will certainly be a principal in the intrigue, which is the most plea¬ sant, as AveU as the most profitable part of tlie ceremony." Thus resolved, the volatile Rosalva went to procure a habit, such as was de¬ scribed, and repairing to the appointed spot, Avalked backAvards and forAvards to amuse himself* as it Avanted near an hour to tiie proposed time. Perhaps our readers may think he Avas cold aud insensible to the danger in which he knenv a felloAV-creature to be placed, and (Ud not act as became him; but bad he raised the officers of justice in pursuit of the ruffian, liis own life here¬ after
after might have been in imminent dan* ger; add to whieh, occurrences of this kind so frequently happen in Venice, that they are nothing thought of A difficulty now presented itself whieh had not before struck him, name* Jy, that Flodiardo might arrive before the gondoUer; but as this could not be guarded against, he was resolved to risk the issue ofa rencounter. However, for¬ tune seemed to favour him, for he saw no sign of his rival, and beheld the man approach with the gondola, who, on land¬ ing, inquired the way to St Euphemia^ as had been agreed upon, to whom he gave the expected answer, and was in¬ stantly conducted to the vessel. Rosalva hugged himself in the idea of his good fortune, and anxiously longed vou i. c to
to behold the fair lady incognita, with whom his meeting would probably be attended by some danger, should he be discovered by the signor whom he per¬ sonated ; but as he had now ventured beyond the poAver of receding, he Avas determined heroically to encounter the event. The boat sAA r iftly gUded along, and in the space of time, which he conjectured to be an hour and a half, they landed on the banks of tlie Brenta, Avhen Pisano making fast the gondola, bade Rosalva fottoAv him; he Avillingly complied, and stopped not until they came to a gate, situated in the back part of a garden, ap¬ parently belonging to some nobleman. His conductor appUed a key to the lock; they entered, and Rosalva felt himself caught
caught hold on by a female, whom he eon* eluded to be the confidant of his destined mistress, by the following salutation— " Oh, signor, how glad am I tliat you are come! My lady, the marchioness, has almost fretted herself to death, lest any accident might have happened to detain you, and tliat probably we might not be able to reach Padua before morn¬ ing. She has collected afl her money and jewels, and intends journeying to¬ wards Paris. But why need I teU you what my lady's letters doubtless have already acquainted you with? Come, signor, for she is impatient to behold you." The confidant led him forward through tlie garden, to the mortification of Ro¬ salva, who now found that hewas to elope with tlie lady, an office which he had not C 2 the
the least desire to engage in; but ende**^ vouring to conceal his confusion, he fol¬ lowed the base eonniver of her mistress's infamy to an elegant saloon, where, paus¬ ing and pointing towards a door, she told him he would find the signora in the next apartment; then retired, leaving Rosalva in a state of perplexity, and for a moment undecided how to act; but summoning all his confidence, he enter¬ ed the room, where, seated on a couch of pink taffeta, he beheld a lady, who, though not very young, had yet charms sufficiently attractive to have given his heart full content, if the terms of elope¬ ment did not purpose too much perma¬ nency for his volatile disposition. On his entrance she held out her hand, and said, " Flodiardo, I am uneasy till we are on our journey; partake of some refreshment,
refreshment, and then we wiU proceed to the carriage, wliich I have ordered to be ready within half an hour after your ar¬ rival." Rosalva felt confounded, but approach¬ ing to the table, where stood the only taper which gave Ught to the room, he took it up, as if to examine sometliing minutely Avhich he had beheld lying on the ground, Avhen purposely stumb¬ ling, extinguished the flame. She had not the least suspicion of his design, but said, in a tender tone of voice, " Are you hurt, Flodiardo ? I Avill ring for attendants, and a fresh ta¬ per." " Beloved marchioness!" said he, in a Ioav key, " there needs no other Ughts in the place Avhere OUvia's eyes shed theh' dazzUng radiance." c3 "Flatterer!*'
* Flatterer!" said she, as she yielded her cheek to the delighted Rosalva, Avho, under the. cover of darkness, had removed his mask, and embraced her; she repelled him faintly; and speaking to her only in whispers, while he left her no doubt that her beloved Flodiardo was before her, he triumphed at once over her virtue and her honour. Swift as lightning reflection foUowed; the critical situation in whieh he stood now struck him with tenfold force, and aU his thoughts were Iioav to extricate himself from the danger he might well apprehend. " My best beloved!" said he, " surely noAV the carriage should be in readiness; we must start directly, if Padua is to be reached by daylight." " Flodiardo!" said the beAvitehed Oli¬ via, " thou love of my heart, and dar¬ ling
ling of my soul! Ave part, I hope, no more! My travelling habit will be ©n in a few minutes, and all is readv." " Then hasten, my love," returned he, " and I wiU again put on my mask, lest Ave incur a discovery." " Do so, Flodiardo," said she, and ringing the bell, the same female who had been liis conductress made her ap¬ pearance, Avith a taper in her hand, and seemingly arrayed for a journey. " Is all in readiness?" inquired Olivia. " It is, signora" replied the other, " The servants suppose my lord has sent the carriage for you, therefore has¬ ten, my lady." The attendant. AvithdreAV, and was im¬ mediately after folkm-ed by Olivia, aa-Uo, suddenly stopping, put into the hand of Rosah r a a casket of rich jeAvels, saying, c 4 " There*
* There, dear Flodiardo, there is aH I cart procure, besides this purse of gold. Take them, with all my heart, for they both are yours." He, with a weU-assumed gratitude, kissed her hand, and leading her to the earriage, seated himself by lier side, and, together with the attendant, the vehicle drove off at full speed. Our adventurer, to avoid discovery, pretended sleep; it was a rude artifice, but the only one which could be effec¬ tive. At dawn of day they arrived in Padua, and stopping at an inn to change horses and refresh, OUvia requested him to unmask, saying there was no dread of danger now. «' I think there is not," replied he, exultingly, iS and therefore, my dear kind marchioness, the humblest of your slaves
slaves obevs the commands of his most ** sovereign mistress;" then pulling off his mask, and sarcastically smiling, he disco¬ vered to the confounded fair one the face of a total stranger. " Oh, holy Virgin! I am betrayed!" said she, rising. " Not unless vou are weak enough to */ o expose your own secret," said Rosalva? preventing her from quitting the room. '" Here are your jewels, signora; take them,for I wish not to be master of either them or your heart, which you so kind¬ ly presented me with. Adieu! divine marchioness! and know that last night, instead of the beloved Flodiardo, you claspt in your embrace the fortunate Ro¬ salva Barozzi." He now, coolly bowing, left the room, while the guilty, indignant lady, vowing c 5 dreadful
dreadful revenge, dismissed her carriage, and returned in a brucello to Venice, from thence to her own seat, the palace of Loredo. In the meantime, Rosalva, exulting in his policy and successful address, had readied his residence, and thoroughly fatigued with his journey, threw himself on a couch, and shortly after sunk into profound sleep, little dreaming how dear¬ ly he was to pay for the frolic in which he had indulged, and had conducted, as he flattered himself, with adroitness and success.
CHAP-
CHAPTER III. The Death-Bed. When Rosalva had entered thePalazzo, lie had seen no one but Henri his valet, avIio boAved obsequiously, and beginning to address him, Avas instantly silenced, by his master teUing him he Avanted re¬ pose, and none of his impertinent loqua¬ ciousness. This hint Avas sufficient for poor Henri, avIio, knoAA'ing the conse¬ quences of forcing his conversation Avhen it Avas not required, left his master to enjoy his rest uninterrupted, c 6 Rosalva*
Rosalva slept tiU a late hour, when wishing to dress for dinner, he summon¬ ed his attendant by loudly sounding the bell Henri quickly appeared, and loAvly boAving, said, " Please your excellenza, my lord the count says he Avill esteem it a favour if, when you have any more commands, not to ring the bell quite so loud." 44 Ah/' cried Rosalva, laughing, "does his head ache after the carnival ?" •* No, my lord, I don't tliink his ex- eellenza's head aches, but I dare say that of the noble Florentine's does, who was last night assassinated at the back of our garden, and who now lies in the room at the left of the gallery." " Assassinated!" eried Rosalva, as the •mysterious conversation he had over¬ heard
heard rushed forcibly on his memory. « Who is he?—What's his name?" ««I think it is the marquis of Loredo," replied the obsequious valet. " Loredo! I have met him at the ri- dotto; but how came he here?" inter¬ rogated the master. " That your excellenza shall hear. Petro went to fasten the baek gate of the garden, when he heard on the other side of the wall a loud scuffle, and the words * Villainous assassin !' This was followed by a deep groan, as if the attacked was overcome, and directly a£ ter he heard footsteps swiftly pass by the high wall, near whieh he was standing. The groan, though faintly, was still re¬ peated. So Petro came hastily in, and told our Erasmus, who quickly inform¬ ed his excellenza, and, to the honour of my
my lord be it spoken, he instantly sent us all to the assistance of the wounded man, who was not quite dead, signor, though very near it. He bled profuse¬ ly, and seemed senseless. Well, to make short of my story, he was put to bed, and medical assistance procured, but he never spoke until some time after your return, my lord." *' Indeed! and why did you not tell me all this, babbler, when I first arrived?" 4i Why, I was about to let your ex¬ cellenza know it, but, if you remember, you said you wanted sleep, and none of my prate." " Well, well," said Rosalva, M and since the marquis has recovered his use of speech, does he say whom he suspects to be the perpetrator ?" 4 * No, my lord; he seems not so much disturbed
disturbed in that respect as he is about his lady the marchioness, Avho, he says, AviU be distracted at his absence; so his excellenza the count bade him make himself easy on that head, for he AA'ould dispatch one of his domestics im¬ mediately, if he Avished for-4*£r attend¬ ance. — * 'Tis some distance/ said the Avounded stranger.—*No matter/ replied his honourable exceUenza, ' he shall have the fleetest horse in my possession." " Well, well, to the point," said Ro¬ salva, eagerly. " Where Avas he to go when he had the horse ?" " Why, my lord, Erasmus is gone in a bnicello, for it is upon the banks of the Brenta." " The Brenta!" cried Rosalva, in sur¬ prise. " 'Tis the same! What did he caU the lady ?" "Did
"Did I not tell your exceUenza?" said Henri, surprised at the hurried man¬ ner of his lord. " She is the marchio¬ ness of Loredo." " Well, but did not he mention her name?—Did he not speak of her as Oriana, Victoria, or Paulina, or any other?" " Oh, I remember/' said Henri, " he kissed a picture Avhich hung round his neck, and called it his adored OUvia." *' Gracious Powers, 'tis she !" exclaim¬ ed Rosalva. " Oh, Circe! Iioav iU de¬ serving such afiection, to repay that ge¬ nerous breast by directing the assassin's hand to the heart Avhich inhabits it!" " Why does your excellenza think she was the person who hired the bravo to murder the marquis ?" inquired the as¬ tonished Henri, His
His master now imvardly cursed his precipitancy and unguarded manner, which, as usual, had betrayed him to the suspicions of his valet, whom he instantly seized by the throat, and holding his poniard over him, vowed that moment should be his last if he did not solemnly sAA*ear by the Virgin never to disclose a single syUable of what he had so inad¬ vertently uttered. *> This the poor terrified fellow made no hesitation in complying with, and was glad to get so cheaply off, well know¬ ing his master Avas a dangerous be¬ ing to deal with when enraged; and for the rest of the day, as much as possible, avoided his presence, his usual mode of proceeding upon like occasions. Rosalva impatiently waited the return of Erasmus, Avondering Iioav the marchio¬ ness
ness ivould act on hearing fate had con- ductedherlordbeneaththeroofofthevery man she had so much cause to fear. He was aroused from his various conjectures by a loud noise issuing from the cham¬ ber appropriated to the use of the Avound¬ ed stranger; he arose from his seat, and repairing thither, inquired the cause, and was informed the marquis was in the agonies of death, anxiously waiting the arrival of liis Avife ere he might breathe his last. On hearing this, he entered the apartment, and beheld, labouring under the most excruciating torments, the af¬ fectionate husband of the ineretricious wretcli with AA'hom he had passed the preceding night. A sensation of pity, mixed Avith indignation against the perfi¬ dious instigator of those dreadful pangs, filled the heait of Rosaha. Henri
Henri entering, hastily announced the arri\ r al of the marchioness. A beam of pleasure flushed the pallid cheek of the much-injured Loredo, as he lifted up his hand, in token of desiring she might be immediately admitted. He Avondered within himself Iioav she would aet at beholding him in the pre¬ sence of her dying husband. " No doubt," thought he, " conscious guilt will quite oA-erpoAArer her, and she AviU confess to her deluded lord the share she has had in this horrible transaction." His supposition was erroneous. The haughty Olivia entered with an erect and steady step, and approacliing the bed with Avell-assumed sorrow, seemed to stifle the grief whieh would have found vent in tears. Rosalva Avas quitting the apartment, * but
- but ere he had closed the door, the mur¬ dered Loredo, in bestoAving a blessing on his faithless wife, Avith a deep groan expired. A loud shriek from OUvia summoned the domestics, who, conducting her to the saloon, proceeded to pay their last duties arid offices of humanity to the de¬ parted marquis. Rosalva, on beholding the pretended grief of OUvia, could scarcely command tliose feeUngs of mdignation which were excited by her weU-managed hypocrisy; and adA r ancing towards her, when out of the hearing of any of the attendants, he satirically said, " Weep not, fair signora, nor dim the lustre of those bright eyes, which shed tlieir lovely radiance on the beloved Flodiardo." , " Signor," said she, Avith an affectation of
of surprise, " I understand you not ! What is't you mean ?" " Mean!" said he, Avondering at her pretended ignorance to Avhat he alluded, " mean, signora! Why sure you have not forgot that this morning at dawn Ave parted at Padua ?" " You are certainly deranged, or in a jesting mood," replied the unblushing mravhioness; " but, pardon me, this is not a proper time for raillery." " Indeed I AA r as never less inclined in all my life," returned he Avith some AA r armth, " for mirth. I do rot jest, and you are as weU convinced of that as myself; and must add, I knoAv not which most to detest, your monstrous atrocity, or your consummate assurance hi denying it." " Signor," replied OUvia, rising, " 'tis time for me to quit your palazzo, when, forgetting
forgetting the rights of hospitality, and the respect due to the widow ofthe mar¬ quis Loredo, you make me the subject of your ribaldry. Neither can I con¬ ceive the latent motive from whence pro- cceds this treatment, as this is the first time I have ever beheld you, and in all probability never should now, but for the melancholy event which has brought me here. But I shall order my attendants to convey home the body of their lord, and after returning my thanks to your noble father for his politeness and ge¬ nerosity, you will excuse me if I de¬ cline remaining longer beneath a roof where I have received such unmerited insult," Thus saying, she stalked forth, leaving Rosalva almost petrified at her amazing confidence.
CHAPTER IV.
The Adoption. Ko great length of time had elapsed after this strange occurrence, ere Rosalva was one night attacked furiously by a bravo, but by his courage and skill he successful¬ ly repelled the assailant, who, however escaped, having wounded him severely in the arm. Not doubting but he was indebted to the lady Olivia for this attempt upon his life, after deliberating maturely, he came to the determination of unfolding the whole
whole affair to his fatlier, which till now he had avoided, on account of the pro¬ mise hehad giA*en to the.depraved mar¬ chioness never to divulge the circum¬ stance; but as he uoav beUeved she thirsted for his blood, he AA*as justified in so doing. When he had imparted to his fond parent the Avhole transaction, it rent his aged bosom, lest his son should fall a victim to the revengeful Olivia, and thought it Avould be the safest expedient for liim to quit Venice, at least until she Avas departed for Florence, as was ex¬ pected. Rosalva, taking liis fiwourite servant Henri and tAvo others, bade adieu to his father, and set out upon his journey to¬ wards a castle, which was situated near Pyrano, inhabited by the marchioness La
Iai Hosa, sister to the lady his mother, who doted on her nephew almost to distraction, and avIio, on his arrival, gave an elegant and splendid/ete in honour of the occasion. Rosalva was fond of the chase, and Inning in one of his excursions been throAA-n from his horse, Avdio ran away, and straying through the forest on foot* Avas, by this accident, the means of re¬ leasing the Avretched RosaUna from her inhuman persecutors. Rosalina being eon ac ved to the castle, and her situation explained to the mar*. •ehioncss, was put to bed, AA'here heir suf¬ ferings preyed upon her senses to such a degree, as brought on a -caging fever. Jn delirium she would call upon her fe» ther—implore the ruffians to release him —tlien execrating their barbarity, in vol. l n frantic
frantic accents Avould shriek aloud for vengeance on their heads. Thus did she rave for many days, till at length, nature exhausted, sunk her into a deep sleep, Avhich the physician pronounced the crisis of her disorder. Youth and a good constitution triumph¬ ed over the conflict of ravaging disease. Waking someAvhat recovered, she gazed round, and for some time seemed busied in tracing the sad events Avhich had brought her to a place she Avas total¬ ly unacquainted with; and her father's image flitting across her imagination, brought to her reUef a friendly shoivcr of tears that prevented a relapse. " Oh, signora," said she to the kind marcliio- ness* who was anxiously watching her recovery, " I know not Iioav to thank your kindness, nor knoAV Avhether I ought
ought to rejoice or grieve at the restora¬ tion of my senses, which now recall the knowledge of my wretchedness.** *' Hush, child!" said her hostess; *' thank our holj Virgin for prolonging your existence, and permitting your es¬ cape with life from the ruffians in whose power you was discovered by my ne¬ phew." " Is he your nephew, lady ? Ah, I remember when 1 heard liis voice as I awoke from insensibility, my first idea was—ah, this is my preserver from de¬ struction ! I then rushed and implored his protection—You know the rest. Ah, niy dearest benefactress! life is sweet, even to the most wretchdd, or where¬ fore should I have sought it» after I had beheld my father weltering in liis blood? Oh God! what had the pious Ferrand o 2 done
done to merit such a death—to perish beneath a murderer's steel — he who Avas all goodness5— avIio AA'ould not haA'e -hurt a worm, or the smallest insect the Omnipotent had endoAved with breath? Meek, gentle, and benevolent to all around him, wliat demon could be to such a soul an enemy ? and yet he sunk weltering in his blood on the Aery spot even Avhere for years his early matins had been raised in pure devotion to our holy Mother. Yes, there,^vvhere, Avith uplift¬ ed hands, I have often seen him implore Heaven's blessing and protection—there did I behold him murdered—my father, my protector, my aU! for avIio has the Avretched Rosalina now left to fly to for aid ? My mother has long since joined her kindred angels, and iioav my last, my dearest, only friend, has foUoAved! Oh, these
these tears must flow for ever! I am without home, without parents,without support! Oh, miserable, forsaken girl!" * 4 Hush! my love " said the marchio¬ ness. ** Can you Avant protection and support while beneath the roof of La Rosa?" " Oh my beloved protectress!" replied the distracted girl, " pardon me, pardon the wretehed Rosalina, whose griefs transport her beyond herself. I never can be sufficiently grateful to my gene¬ rous benefactress, who has attended me in sickness; but who AviU hereafter re- eeiAe me? If I return to my cottage, who shaU cultivate our little vineyard, now my father is no more? Can I again behold the place where I srav my vene¬ rable parent perish ?" •* Fear not, my child; you shall hence- d 3 forth
forth reside with me; your misfortunes have excited my pity, and your ingenu¬ ous simpheity won my esteem; and if Rosalina wiU accept the marchioness La Rosa's protection, she shaU never want a friend or parent." " Oh, dear marchesa," said the grate¬ ful girl, " let my tears thank you, for words are too poor, and my actions must prove my feeUngs, which cannot by any other method be expressed." " Fear not," said the marchioness, ten¬ derly pressing her hand; " and if you can sufficiently confide in my friendship, by unfolding to me your history from its earUest period, I shaU esteem myself sufficiently repaid." " Alas, lady! if the recital of the life of a simple girl like me, who has never been but beneath one roof since she can remember,
remember, AviU prove of any satisfaction, you may command it freely." " WeU, dear RosaUna," said the mar¬ chioness, " you shaH not at present fa¬ tigue yourself by too much conversation; only answer me one question—do you think the viUains Avdiom my nephew saw were common robbers, who sought but for booty, or assassins, employed by some enemy to your father?" " Alas, madam! I cannot tell; I do not think my father was of consequence enough to be dreaded by any one; ha¬ ted I am sure he could not be, therefore I think they were marauders belonging to the banditti who have long infested the forest adjacent to our humble dAvetting/* The marchioness, musing, said, "Tvras strange!" and imprinting a kiss on the cheek of Rosalina, Avith a renewal of her D 4 promised
promised protection, left her to repose, and repairing to her nephew, communi¬ cated the welcome tidings of her being out of danger. This was pleasing intelligence to Ro¬ salva, who had thought of nothing else but Rosalina since the first moment he beheld her. This he ascribed to pity; and when feelings, which he knew not how to define, were mixed with his thoughts* of her, he would exclaim, <( The circum¬ stances I first beheld her in were s^ strange, that she lias a claim upon my protection." Then he would sigh so heavily when his aunt said her recovery was doubtful. Ah, Rosalva! the pea¬ sant girl Rosalina in one poor moment had aroused a sensation in that heart, which all the beauties of Venice could not. effect even in years. Rosalva, the gay
gay, the libertine Rosalva, for the first time in his life felt love in its pure state, uncorrupted, and free from all sensual de¬ sires. In the space of a few days, the fair suf¬ ferer Avas enabled to leave her chamber. A loose robe, Avhite, emblem of the pu¬ rity of her lieart, AAdiose bosom it cover¬ ed, Avas the dress of our heroine; while the languid smile, which, in spite of sor- ix)av, she endeavoured to assume, added to her pale biit beautiful countenance, and gave her the appearance of some¬ thing more than mortal, as Rosalva thought, Avhile he contemplated her witlr such adoration and respect as a sinner pays to the image of a favourite saint. He took her hand, and with unfeigned pleasure congratulated her upon- her re- coverA\ n 5 "I thank
" I thank you, my lord," said Rosa¬ lina, smiling gracefutty. " But for your kind interference, I should ere this have been past all cure in this world. I knoAV not hoAV to repay yom* goodness, nor the dear marchesa's, your noble and benevo¬ lent aunt, who has sheltered beneath her hospitable roof an orphan, friendless and forlorn." A, tear unbidden started, but she checked it ere it fell. The drop settled beneath her fringed eyelash, and appear¬ ed as the orient pearl when it ornaments the superior diamond. " If it would not renew the soitoavs of Rosalina," said Rosalva, tenderly, " I would venture to inquire how you came into the hands of those ruffians from v horn it was my happy lot to be the means of rescuing you ?" " My
" My lord, you may command me," answered RosaUna; and as she spoke, a crimson blush tinged her cheek, for her eye met the earnest admiring gaze of her deliverer. " No, not now, my sweet girl," en¬ joined the marchioness; " by too much discourse you wiH endanger and retard your recovery." "Ah no, madam," said she; "thanks to your goodness, I am sufficiently weU, and will, if you please, commence the promised recital of my history, whieh is not an eventful one, and contains but Ut¬ tle to excite the interest of a stranger." " You wrong yourself," cried Rosalva, " greatly; for every thing must excite interest that belongs to RosaUna;' She slightly inclined her head in re- d 6 turn
turn to this compliment, and began in the folloAving manner— " My father was by birth a French¬ man: misfortunes had driven him to seek refuge here in Italy, together with my motlier, whom I cannot remember, fbr she died while I AA r as in a state of h*- * fancy; and often have I heard my dear -father grieA*ously deplore her loss, in bitter tears of sorrow. I have reason to think he AA-as descended from some family of dis¬ tinction, and did not ahv&ys move in the *• humble sphere in Avhicb I have been reared, for he possessed many elegant accomplishments generally unknoAA r n to A'intagers. He Avas the tenderest of pa¬ rents, and took upon himself the care of my tuition. The improvement I made from his instructions afforded hiin infi¬ nite
nite pleasure, and he would Usten with great attention while I read from his fa¬ vourite authors, or played on the harp. (whieh was his delight), when he return¬ ed from the vineyard of an evening, while we enjoyed the pure air, which wafted through the window of our hum¬ ble dAvelling. Ah. madam,, these Avere liappy days! but, a his! they are fled, ne- \ er again to return. No more «^all lie smile approbation as he listens to my aoiig! No more A\*ill he rapturously trace in, iny countenance the resenibkintr of features to my departed mother, or praise my humble attempts when Avith a pencil I used to sketch views of my most favourite spots round our enchanting eottaoe!" The tears from her lovely eyes now courted each other SAviftly down her pal¬ lid
Ud cheeks at the recoUection of past felicity; but checking them Avith aU the poAver she could assume, she thus conti¬ nued— " But to finish my short, though ca¬ lamitous tale. 'TAA'as on the close of evening, when the rest of the vintagers had retired to rest, and we were on the point of doing the same, a loud knock¬ ing at the door alarmed us. I arose, irre¬ solute whether to unclose it or not. But my dear, unsuspecting father, cried, 4 Haste, Rosalina; perhaps some of our neighbours are iU, and want assistance/ I instantly compUed, and unfastening the door, two ruffians rushed in; one of them caught hold of me, and drawing a poniard, appeared ready to plunge it in my bosom. The horror Avhich I felt caused me immediately to swoon, from which;
which, when I was someAvhat recovered, oh, God! 'twas to behold the dreadful sight of my venerable father bleeding at my feet! Oh, Avhat a heart of stone must be mine, that it did not at that in¬ stant burst! What followed I knoAV not, for I Avas insensible until the arrival of the signor, whom Heaven Avas most graciously pleased to make the instru¬ ment of my deUvery, and Avho must be better acquainted Avith succeeding cir¬ cumstances than myself." She noAV for a moment paused, then said, "My gracious benefactress! I have one request to make, which, if your ex¬ alted goodness would indulge me, I would hereafter, submitting Avith resig¬ nation to the decrees of Providence, en¬ deavour to forget my sufferings, and strive to be all that you wish me." With
With a voice full of sweetness, the marchioness answered, "Dear girl, I promise, should it be in my poAver, no¬ thing shall be AA'anting to make you happy." Rosalina then thanking her patroness, said, " My desire is, madam, that you will permit some one to conduct me to the cottage which I once inhabited, to learn if the last sad duties have been paid to the corse of my beloved father, and to drop the tear of filial duty on his grave; then I will return to your gracious pro¬ tection, and for this indulgence will ever endeavour to prove most truly grateful." k *' f is a request which shows the un¬ feigned piety of your heart, and I will, if you think proper, instantly attend vou/' cried Rosalva, starting up. " Hold, nephew," said the marchio¬ ness ;
ness; *' you are so impetuous. Rosalina shall go, but with this necessary restric¬ tion. I think, my love, from what 1 can gather from the narration of your simple tale, that it is evident the villains were employed to seize upon your per¬ son ; therefore it would be wisest to have the precaution not to drop a hint where you are to reside in future; and on your return, to ward off a similar danger, you sliaU change your appellation to one whieh I will myself appoint'* 44 Ah, dear signora, how watchful you are for my safety! How do I merit such extraordinary kindness ? M ** Why," answered Rosalva, taking the hand of his aunt, and pressing it to his lips, " you are in affliction; yon are amiable, and want protection; and that
that was ever a claim sufficient to the friendship of the marchioness La Rosa." " Ah, nephew," cried she, " you have learnt the art of flattery, and I shall chide yoa for using it to me." " Nay, my dear aunt," replied the other, " I never use guile, but aiways speak the true sentiments of my heart." " WeU, Rosalina, my child, when you are able," resumed the marchioness, "you shatt commence your journey; but I fear you are too weak to undertake it at present/* "Ah, madam, urge no delay, I beseech you," answered RosaUna; " I make no doubt but I shafl be sufficiently recover¬ ed by to-morrow, under the care of the signor." " What is the name of the place ?— Can you direct my nepheAv to it ?" "Oh
w Oh yes, madam; it is called the Val¬ ley ofthe Vintagers; there are but five or six cottages besides our own, which stands north of the fcresf* " We are full seven leagues from it," said Rosalva. ** Henri and Paulo shall attend us, and we will go round by the road, and so escape the danger of being lost in the intricacies ofthe wood." This being agreed on by each of the party, they separated for the night, the marchioness pleased with self-gratifica¬ tion of being instrumental in the preser¬ vation of a fellow-creature—-Rosalina at the idea of again beholding the sweet vait of her nativity—and Rosalva de¬ lighted with that of attending her*
CHAP-
CHAPTER V. The Grave. When our heroine reached her cham¬ ber, she reflected with pleasure on her mtended journey, mixed with painful sensations occasioned by her dear father's unhappy death. A sigh burst from the inmost recesses of her heart, suc¬ ceeded by a torrent of tears, which gave some degree of ease to her labouring bo¬ som, and offering up a fervent prayer to the Virgin for fortitude to support her afflictions,
afflictions, she sank into a refreshing slumber. In the morning she was awakened by an attendant, who eame to assist Iht in arraying herself in a travelling-dress pre¬ pared for the occasion, who infonned her that Paulina (the name of a female do¬ mestic) was to attend on her journey. This the delicate marchioness had pre¬ viously concerted, to prevent the inde¬ corum of Rosalina's being alone with her nephew, whose admiration for women she well knew, and was not surprised at the ardency of his looks towards one so lovely, who would have fired a heart not half so susceptible. Rosalina was then in her sixteenth year; her person well proportioned, and of the middle size; a complexion whieh vied in beauty with the transpa¬ rent
rent lily; eyes fine and dark, whose languishing briUiancy gave lustre to a face expressive of every virtue which can adorn the sex; her longhair, which waved upon her taper neck and grace¬ ful shoulders, in all the luxuriance of na¬ ture, rendered her appearance more than commonly engaging. The prudent marchioness resolved, on the first opportunity, to send Rosalva back to Venice, or place RosaUna in security at a neighbouring conA'ent till his departure, thinking tliat by such me¬ thod of separation it would cheek the growth of any passion which probably would be excited between persons of their susceptible age, and might hereaf¬ ter only prove the source of unhappiness; but this intended arrangement she kept concealed, well knowing if she appeared to
to oppose the inclinations of her nephew, it would act as a* stimulus, and inflame his wild, unchecked desires. Itosalina, after bidding her adieu, stepped into the carriage, which was wait¬ ing, attended by Rosalva and Paulina, The two faithful domestics, Henri and Paulo, followed the vehicle on horseback, which rolled sv iilly along; and after a few hours riding, she came in sight of the valley where she first drew her breath. The neat white cottages appeared peep¬ ing forth from amidst the fruitful vines. The happy inhabitants were passing their harmless jests, and earroling their merry songs; thus lightening the fa¬ tigue of labour, as each in his own vine¬ yard exerted his daily toil to prune and dress the grateful trees, whose ample pro¬ duce rewarded well their pains. So passed
passed their days, free from the noise of cities, or the bustling stir of the busy Avorld; unmindful ofthe cares of kings or •courts, with'consciences undisturbed by guilt, they lived in harmony, innocence, and pe-ace* Rosalina looking beheld her own hum¬ ble, and once happy dwelling; she point¬ ed it out to Rosalva, but dared not trust her tongue to speak, lest her faltering voice should betray the sorrowful feel¬ ings she in vain struggled to conceal. He directed the driver to proceed to¬ wards tiie gate of the garden, which se¬ parated it from the beaten road. The carriage stopped, and as they alighted, two of the villagers, whose at tention had been attracted by the sight of the equipage, came forward, for the purpose of informing tliem that the eot- tasre
tsige was uninhabited; one of them re¬ cognised our heroine, and almost shout¬ ing with joy, cried^ " 'Tis RosaUna Si Almo! Run and teU your mother," said he to the youth who accompanied him. Rosalina laid her hand on his arm, and looking in his face, exclaimed, " My fa¬ ther, Gerrard—is my father buried ?" The honest peasant, wiping a tear from his cheek, faltered out, " He is! But your grapes are flourishing—your furni¬ ture is safe. Here is the key of the cot¬ tage, wliich 1 have kept in my possession, hoping you would one day or other come to make your claim; and, the Virgin be praised, here you are! But how did you escape? for I suppose you was forced -away." " Alas! I was indeed," answered Ro¬ salina. vol, l E •• Ah.
" Ah, damigeHa, the morning after, as I was passing by the house, I thought I Avould step in and ask your good father for something for the relief of my poor cluld, who laid grievously ill, and you know he used to be a kind of doctor to u&att WeU, when I knocked at the door, no one answered, Avhich surprised me greatly; and after waiting a little, 1 ventured to Uft up the latch, Avhen I was stmck almost senseless at Avhat I beheld. But why should I repeat it ?"' said he, seeing RosaUna almost ready to sink with grief. " WeU, we buried the body with decency, and all the respect Ave could shew, and concluding that one day you might return, we took care of your vine¬ yard, and locked up your cottage. There, dear Rosa-/* said he, throAving open the door, " there is aU as you left it." " No!"
** No!" mentaUy exclaimed Rosalina, <* not all;" but slie checked her feeUngs, and sinking into a chair, thanked the ho¬ nest peasant as weU as she Avas able. She was aroused from the reverie In whieh she was a few moments plunged by the amA'al of most of the vintagers, avIio came to Avelcome her return, {for the youth Gerrard had sent to acquaint his mother [had spread throughout the Avhole A*alley the news of her arrival); but their joy was damped on her saying she was about to leave the place for eA*er. She Avent into the chamber of her fa¬ ther, and desiring no one to interrupt her meditations, sunk on her knees, and poured forth her Avhole soul in fervent prayer to the great Disposer of all things; then resting for a few moments on the side of the couch AA T here her be¬ is 2 loved
loved father once used to sleep, endea¬ voured to rouse to her relief sufficient fortitude to enable her to make proper arrangements. On finding her feelings somewhat composed, she proceeded tt) unlock the drawers where her father used to deposit his most valuable property, as the place of greatest security, in which she disco¬ vered two purses of gold, and a small bundle of papers and letters. These she took, togetlier with a ring, which was once worn by her father, and another, by which he had used to set great store. A pearl of immense size was in the centre, surrounded by a slendei] twist of hair, and without the hair a/circular row of fine sapphires; and on the back of the gold setting, in large and distinct characters, were seen the letters " F. B." This she placed
placed on her finger; and opening the casement for air, she beheld in the gar¬ den a neAv-made grave, Avith a stone, on which Avere roughly cut the Avords— " Sacred to the memory of Ferrand St. Almo, icho xcas barbarously murdered by assassins? She clasped her hands in *> agony, and raising her eyes to heaven, cried, "Yes! thou Avert indeed barba¬ rously murdered! Oh, gracious PoAvers! give me strength to support this sight! Oh my father!" A flood of tears iioav came to her relief, and sinking on a seat, she gaA'e way to her sorroAvs. She Avas aroused by a rap at the door, for Rosalva greiv impatient; and fear¬ ing she might be ill, ivould not be re¬ strained by honest Gerrard, avIio fain Avould have had him desist. He retreat¬ ed on Rosalina's saying she Avould at- i: a tend;
tend; and coming forth with a small parcel in her hand, said she should soon be ready for departure. Amongst tlie villagers-ishe distributed several articles by way of keepsakes, who ajl dropt a few tears at the idea of sepa- ration. She then, addressing Gerrard, and endeavouring to force a smile, said. " TM tlie vineyard, and keep the garden in order, and take to yourself the produce whkh tbey yield. Receive again the key pf the cottage, and let your daugh¬ ter who wps lately married inhabit it with her husband. Hcrp they may find a home for ever, p^ovi<]ed I should not vet\\m\ but if I sliould, J trust I shaU fnid a roof to shelter me." " To shelter thee, Rosa!" said honest Gerrard. " Ah, madhmgelk*, * by will you leave us at aU ? Could you not be happy
happy here ? Pardon me, signor," turn¬ ing to. Rosalva, " I doubt not signora Rosa's neAV protectors love her, (indeed Avho can do otherAvise?) but they wiU not make her more happy than we, at least than AA T hat Ave Avoidd endeavour to do." Rosalina felt half inclined to take the peasant at his word, but thought it Avould appear Uke ingratitude towards those Avho liad reUeved her from peril, and made such generous offers of pro¬ tection; therefore thanking the honest vintager for his good witt, she promised to return, should she ever Avant an asylum. Watching for a fit opportunity, she slipped into the garden by a back way unobserved. She knelt, and dropt a tear upon the sod which covered the body of her father; then accompanying Rosalva to tlie cairiage, stepped in; and, after E 4 bidding
bidding a long adieu to all her neigh¬ bours, departed from the place of her na¬ tivity amidst their Avishes and prayers for her Avelfare. Rosalina continued gazing upon the once happy cottage, and waving her handkerchief to the peasants, who fol- loAved her Avith their anxious eyes, until the carriage ascended the hiUs Avhich di¬ vided the vaUey from the road, and ob¬ scured them from sight; when unable longer to smother her grief, she burst into a torrent of tears, and sunk into a corner of the carriage, to indulge in her -sorrow. To RosaI\ r a s s endeavouring to sooth, and offer her consolation, she re¬ plied, " Alas, my lord! esteem me not insensible to your kindness, but alloA\ me onee more to dAveU upon the scenes of my childhood; do not seek to prevent ni)
my tears; they give ease to a heart al¬ most bursting with the various feeUngs which assail it; think not I am ungrate¬ ful in refusing your consoling advice, for I revere, though I cannot profit by it." Rosalva desisted, and was silent till they had nearly reached the castle, Avhen perceiving RosaUna diy her eyes, and appear as if she Avished to assume a look of placidity on meeting the marchioness, he ventured an observation, to AAdiich she with seeming tranquillity replied, and at length entered into conversation,to the -jreat iov of Paulina, Avho all the time sat upon thorns, because she eould nei¬ ther speak herself, nor hear any on^else. Rosalva directed the attention of his fair companion to tlie beautiful sceiiery that surrounded them, which was truly sublime, and merited the attention it ex- x: 5 cited,
cited hi the mind of Rosalina. On one tide, an $xtensiA 7 e forest, filled with tall trees, whose leafy branches resounded in gentle murmurs, by the freshening breeze whichiEolus then was wafting all around; on the other, an extensive chain of mountains, the toAvering heads of Avhich seemed lost in the fleeting clouds that passed in quick succession. In one place was seen the anxious shepherd, with eager eye, and palpitating heait, clambering on the rugged mountain's side, in pursuit of the fugitive chamois, while the wanton straggler, mocking his vain attempt, leapt upon tlie craggy point of a jutting rock, where human foot had never trod, and seemed to the beholder's eye poized in air, Avhence,if by *£■ giddy chance it had lost its balance, it must inevitably have been precipitated headlong
headlong into the loud roaring torrent, whicli sought its rapid course in the deep windings at the foot of the stupendous cttff. In another, the happy shepherdess, resting on her crook, watched the inno¬ cent gambols of the playful kids, that Avere frisking in sportive tricks round their gentle dams, gave to her the grate¬ ful delight of beholding thus her humble stores increase. While Rosalina's thoughts were gra- duaUy engaged by this enchanting scene, the carriage moved SAviftly on, tiU at length tlie Castle of La Rosa appeared in VICAV, The marchioness stood ready to re¬ ceive her adopted chUd, whom slie felt persuaded Avas of some noble, but unfor¬ tunate family in France; for it AA T as un¬ likely that any one of low extraction e 6 shoidd
should possess the qualifications that be¬ long only to people of rank, and which had been communicated to her by her father's sole tuition. When Rosalina alighted, she received her at the portal, and kissing her cheek, bade her welcome to her future home, for which she return¬ ed her gratefid acknowledgments. The marchioness then taking her hand, enter¬ ed the saloon, followed by Rosalva, who recounted to his aunt their reception from theviUagers. "Ah," thought she, when her nephew had ceased, '* this giri must ever have been truly amiable, or those honest peasants would not have been so veiy desirous of her remaining with them f and turning, said, "My child, henceforward I shall always ever esteem you as if really mine; you shall no lon¬ ger be Rosalina St Almo, but for the fu- ture
ture be styled Rosa Falieri; and,nepheAV, I beseech you never to mention this ne¬ cessary deception, even to our dearest fricndsjit Venice, aa horn, by the bye, I intend visiting at the feast ofthe regatta." " Enough, my dear aunt/' replied lie; '• you may firmly rely on my prudence, and no indiscreet discovery on my part shall ever endanger the safety of Rosa v alien. Rosalina bowed in token of thankful¬ ness ; and lights being brought, she re¬ quested permission to retire, which Avas readily granted. On her leaving the place, the marchio¬ ness said, " Rosalva, I have news for you. Here is a Ictter from Venice, in Avhich your father requests your imme¬ diate attendance." Had a thunderbolt fallen at his feet he could
could not have been more surprised. ** How, madam," ansAvered he, ^ return to Venice! Has my father forgot the danger under Avhich I lie, from the dag¬ ger of the assassin ?" " No," returned she; " but he says all danger has ceased, for the marchioness Loredo has long since been gone to Flo¬ rence, her paternal home; therefore, my dear nepheAv,'tis fit you obey your fatlier, who, I am sorry to say, adds that he is ill, and particularly Avishes to see you. I have given orders for the preparation ne¬ cessary for your journey, and to-morroAV you may set forward." Rosalva now perceived there was no method of extricating himself without betraying his passion for the lovely peav sant, which had hourly increased, beyond aU power of resistance; and lest his aunt might
might discoA*er it, made light of return¬ ing home; said he AA'as glad aU apprehen¬ sions for his safety had subsided, but AA r as sorry his father AA r as indisposed; begged the marchioness Avould attend the feast of the regatta, Avhich aa-rs to be held in a feAV Aveeks, and retired in seem¬ ing good spirits, insomuch that he quite deceived the un\A T ary marchioness, wlio now thought that he had onlv regarded »-* * o Rosalina with an eye of pity for her mis¬ fortunes, and concluded with the resolu¬ tion of suffering her accompanying her to Venice. In the morning aU AA-as prepared for the departure of Rosalva, who, taking the hand of his aunt, and that of Rosa¬ lina, he joined them, at the same time saying, " My dear aunt, never let your friendship
friendship towards this poor orphan de¬ cline, until her conduct merits the with¬ drawing yotir protection; and do you, Rosalina, never forget to look on my re¬ lation as a parent. Adieu, sweet girl! Heaven bless you ! and may fortune al¬ ways prove as propitious as your inno¬ cence and loveliness deserve! Fare¬ well, rny dear aunt!" and brushing a tear from off his cheek, as if ashamed of his weakness, departed, leaving the mar¬ chioness ovenvhclmed with surprise at his tender method of separation. tfc Rosalva improves," said she; '• he liad not used to be so moral, nor did he ever before possess one serious thought or reflection." Rosalina was truly sorry at his depar¬ ture, for she felt gratitude towards him
as
as her deliverer; but that all-powerful, unresisting passion, catted love, had not vet entered her heart. *T Weeks passed on, and she increased in lavour Avith the marchioness more and more, Avho found in her the companion she had often Avished to have in her so¬ litude. She would play on the harp in the evening as they enjoyed the cooUng zephyr, which Avafted through a groAe of pines, or read, Avhile her benefactress was embroidering, (the favourite amusement of the latter). Thus one aA T oeation suc¬ ceeding another, she had no time to re¬ vert to her oavii sorrows; therefore, if she could not be termed happy, at least she Avas tranquil, and felt unfeigned reve¬ rence and love for the indulgent and be¬ nevolent marchioness La Rosa.
CHAP-
CHATTER VI. The Mask. When Rosalva (after a safe journey) arrived in Venice, he was astonished at the altered appearance of his father, who Avas pale and emaciated, and no less changed in health than in temper; for he was noAv grown imperious and pet¬ tish, even towards his son, whom he had treated with such great indulgence, that he could but iU bear this great change in his disposition. He would suffer no one near him but a favourite page, whom he
he had lately taken under his protection, and seemed fast sinking into a hypochon¬ driac state, caring for no company or amusement but his own melancholy thoughts. He continued thus till the feast ofthe regatta, when mustering all his usual spi¬ rits, proposed to meet the concourse of people that were to be assembled for the purpose of the celebration of the birth- d-y of his son. A grand/?/*? was to be given at the Palazzo di Barozzi, in ho¬ nour of the occasion, and half the nobles in Venice were expected to grace it with tiicir presence. Amongst the rest came the marchioness La Rosa, and her lovely ward, for whose arrival he waited with the utmost impatience. " Beloved Rosa!" he would mentaUy exclaim, " thou re- semblest in purity and innocence of heart
heart the lilies which ornamented the garden of thy cottage, and where thou stoodst confessed paramount, as the fairest of the fair! Accursed be he that Avould rob thee of thy virtue, or despott the brightest jewel ever contained in so rich a casket! Yet, can I av ed her ? Impos¬ sible ! My haughty father Avould never consent to such a measure; add to AAdiich, she is but a peasant, and our laws are such, that by espousing her I shalMe- base my own issue, for, alas! she is not a cittacUna. Curse on all such mles which prevent me calling her Avife! Well then, she shall not hear of my passion—I will not rob her of her peace—no; I will not be villain base enough to steal into her guileless bosom, and plant there a Avound which neither time nor circum¬ stance can ever cure." Thus
Thus argued Rosalva, who, with all his faults, when he gave a moment to reflec¬ tion, AA r ould never commit a premeditated Avrong; generous friendship could gloAV around his lieart, and the unfortunate had often felt the warm effects of his be¬ nevolence. After this laudable resolution, he went forth to meet the object of his affections as collected as possible. After the usual salutations had pissed between him and his aunt, he conducted theni to a saloon, Avhere Avas seated his father. " La mar¬ chesa La Rosa," said he, announcing her. The marquis boAved, and expressed himself pleased at her attendance, "For/' said he, " 'tis so seldom that you can be prevailed upon to leave your retirement, that I think myself and son highly ho¬ noured by this mark of your politeness/ 1 •* I have
" I have a stranger to introduce to your notice," said Rosalva, leading forth our heroine; " this is Rosa Falieri, my aunt's ward/* The marquis fixed his eyes on her ear¬ nestly,^ if some sudden recollection, not of tiie most pleasant kind, crossed his memory. " What is the lady's name ?" mt asked he. "Rosa Falieri," repeated Rosalva, somewhat astonished at the manner in Avhieh his father seemed to observe the lovelv fair one. The marquis slightly bowed to Rosa, avIio iioav shrunk from his earnest gaze, which he perceiving, turned the conver¬ sation ; and entering upon various sub¬ jects, amongst others, mentioned thef&te, and asked the marchioness Avhat character she intended to support in the mask ? " I have
" I have not yet thought of it 9 n said she, smiling; " but it is all in good time at present." The marquis began to grow thought¬ ful, and appeared as if conversation wa.4 irksome to him, which the marchioness perceiving, made some plausible excuse for leaving the place, to the great joy of Rosa, who, for some reason which she eould not define, felt uneasy and embar¬ rassed in his presence. Rosalva quickly followed, and address¬ ing himself to the signora, said, " Dear aunt, teU me what dress vou intend to 7 */ wear in the mask, for I should like to be able to distinguish my friends." ** You shall know," answered she, " ere the time arrives, not only mine, but also that of Rosa, whom I am now going to consult upon the subject." « Well,
" WeU, I will trust you," said he, and retired. As the ladies sought their apartments, the marchioness said to Rosa, " What AviU you choose to represent at the ensu¬ ing mask? WUl you personate Ve¬ nus, or Pattas, or what ?" "Alas, dear madam! why should I presume to mix amongst the noble lords and ladies of Venice—I, a poor orphan, at best but a humble peasant ? Ah, I Avould you had left me at the Castle of La Rosa, for methinks his exceUenza looks upon me as an intruder. Did you not see Uoav coldly he looked upon me ?" " You are," replied the other, " too diffident, my dear, of your oavii deserts ; nor do J regard you as a peasant; a com¬ bination of circumstances convinces me that you are of superior extraction. That jeAvel
jewel on your finger plainly speaks that it was never originally the property of a plebeian ; no ; and I feel assured, my child, that your birth is as exalted as your merit, therefore no more refusals in attending the mask." " Weil, I AviU in every thing obey you, my dear madam," said Rosa, rais¬ ing the hand of the other, and pressing- it gratefully to her lips ; " but did you not observe the manner-of his excellenza di Barozzi ?" " Yes/' ansAvered the marchioness; " but I did not think it cold, or devoid of that politeness Avhich eA 7 er Avas the characteristic of the marquis." The truth Avas, she had observed the manner of her brother with astonish¬ ment, but did not wish to express her real opinion on the subject, and turning vol. i. v to
to another more pleasing, they discour¬ sed near an hour, then separated for the night. Rosa in vain courted sleep, for she still beheld in imagination the dark eye of her host earnestly fixed on her face. " Can he ever have known me ?" she mentaUy exclaimed. " No, that's im¬ possible ! Away then Avith aU idle, un¬ grateful thoughts. I ought to be happy. in the protection of my beloved patro¬ ness, avIio confers her favours Avith so sweet a grace, that she appears the one obliged, and not the generous donor." Thus did she soUloquize, until the ri¬ sing beams of the morn, in golden rays, tinged the windows of her apartment, when nature growing weary, caused her to sink into the arms of generous sleep. After some repose, she was aroused from
from slumber by the voice of Paulina, whicii convinced her it must be late. Starting from her couch, she asked if the marchioness had risen ? "She has breakfasted these two hours," answered the other. " Then Avhy did you not caU me?" asked Rosa. " I am ashamed to be such a sluggard/* " I should have done it," repUed Pau¬ lina, " but her exceUenza the marchio¬ ness ordered me to come and see if you stiU slept, and if you did, to let you re¬ main." " She is all goodness," said Rosa. " Ah, see what she has sent you," said the other, pointing to a sofa, where lay a splendid dress of green, ornamented Avith shells of silver; " my lady intends you shaU represent Thetis, and be dis- f 2 covered
covered near the cascade, which is to play to-night in the garden during the fete; it will be so grand, signora! and no one will be better dressed than your¬ self. Oh,how gay you wul appear amidst aU the coloured lamps!" Rosa could have wished to have been in a character less conspicuous, but as it was the wul of the marchioness, she was resolved not to let a single word of regret on the occasion escape her; and after she had breakfasted, repaired to the apart¬ ment of the latter to thank her for this mark of attention, which she did with aU the warmth of one who had received the greatest favour. " Ah, I am glad you are pleased, Rosa," said she, « for you are indebted to Rosalva for the character you are to sustain. The cascade is a contrivance of
of his own, and he wanted a Thetis, to render the scene more striking. When it is discovered, you have nothing to do than remain stationary until the curtain descends on the ceasing of the music, which is to be concealed behind the rocks." " I shall use my best endeavours to sustain what is allotted me," said Rosa. " I have no doubt of your good inten¬ tions in every thing," answered the mar¬ chioness, at the same time tenderly kiss¬ ing ber cheek, and recommending her to be ready in time. After an early dinner, they separated, for the purpose of preparing for the oc¬ casion. While Rosa arrayed herself in the splendid habit, yoathful vanity whisper¬ ed to her heart that it became her, and, f 3 for
for the first time in her Ufe, she took pains at the toilet. Her hair was twist¬ ed round her head in smaU braids, in which was placed, Avith a great degree of taste, a broach of coral, while the light¬ ness of her drapery, fitted to her sylph- like form, enabled her Avell to support the appearance of the imaginary deity she was to represent. To the scene of festive mirth she went by a private entrance, and placing her¬ self as directed by Rosalva, waited, with some degree of timidity, until she was discovered. The melodious strains of bewitching harmony, from a weU-selected band, an¬ nounced the beginning of the f He. The dancing then commenced, and innumer¬ able variegated lamps, hung in fanciful devices, gave Ught to the jocund group, who,
who, with airy steps and Uvely gambols, gaily tripped beneath a sky of etherial blue. The marquis, seated by the side of the marchioness La Rosa, on an exalted seat, viewed this exhilarating scene, and seem¬ ed to have recovered his usual flow of spirits. At an appointed signal the curtain of green drew up, and discovered a sight which attracted the attention of all be¬ holders. A cascade, with roaring sounds, was seen pouring into the sea, in which, seat¬ ed on a car drawn by Tritons, appeared Neptune and Thetis. The lovely and interesting appearance of the latter soon caught the earnest gaze of all the Vene¬ tian youths then assembled, and the questions of "Who is she? Do you know F 4 her ?"
her?" ran in Avhispers throughout the garden. On the falling ofthe curtain, a young Florentine, wishing to be acquainted with her name, sought out Rosalva for the purpose of making inquiry. He soon discovered him by his dress, which Avas that of Apollo, to whom he-laugh¬ ingly said, "Would you deign to vouch¬ safe, divine god of poetry, to inform me who or what is that beautiful represen¬ tative of Thetis ?" " Ah, what, then, you are caught, An- gelo?" said Rosalva. ' *' Nay, do not trifle," said the other, *' but tell me." " Well then, she is the ward of my aunt, and her name is Rosa Falieri," an- sAvered Rosalva. " WeU, go on/' ** Nay,
"Nay, I cannot teU you more, because I know not more myself," said he, and set off in pursuit of a Minerva, whom he perceived at a small distance, leaving the young noble but half satisfied with this information. On his approach the lady had mixed with the crowd; and while he was en¬ deavouring to regain a sight of her, he was surprised by Rosa's catching his arm, and in tremulous accents, entreating him to conduct her to the palazzo. " What has alarmed you, sweet girl ?" said he; " you look pale and terrified." She pointed to a woman in strange at¬ tire, saying, " 'Tis she who has thus frightened me, by speaking something* that has shocked me inexpressibly.'* " Oh!" said Rosalva, smiling at her simplicity, " she is only supporting her f 5 character.
character-, which is that of Medea, a sor¬ ceress/' " I think she is indeed a sorceress? said Rosa, shuddering. " Come," added he, " aUow me to conduct you to my aunt/' He led her forward, and placed her by the marchioness, who congratulated her on the appearance which she had made in her character. " Ah, dear marchesa, there is one in the garden who supports hers better than I did mine, and behold she approaches; let us retire, dear madam, for I am fear¬ ful of her—do pray let us retire." " SiUy girl," said the marchioness; " what! afraid of a mask!" " Ah, madam, you know not what words of terrific import she has address¬ ed to me," said Rosa. By
By this time the strange-looking per¬ son dreAV near, and advancing towards the marquis, in a sepulchral kind of voice, cried, " Marquis, cross my hand, and I AviU acquaint your exceUenza Avith your future fate." " Be gone!" cried he, in atone of plea¬ santry ; " I do not wish to encourage di- yiners; be gone, or I shaU commit you to the charge of the officers ofthe Inqui¬ sition." He carried on this conversation with so much raiUery, that a number of his guests Avere attracted to the spot, not only by his refusal to have his fate prog¬ nosticated; but also the earnest manner in which he was desired to look into the book which unfolded future events by the sorceress, Avhose appearance was so very strange, that, though only at a mask, f 6 she
she excited a degree of horror in aU the beholders. Her robe was of Avhite, bordered with various mystic figures; round her head o was entwined a serpent; her long, black, matted hair hung disgustingly on her shoulders; while her piercing dark eyes rolled beneath the raven locks which half concealed her face, and seemed to read the hearts of the surrounding spec¬ tators. In her right hand she held a wand, and in her left a book, Avliich she caUed the Mystery of Fate, and into whieh she frequently invited them to look. Barozzi grew somewhat peevish at her frequent urgent requests, and at last, ra¬ ther sharply, bade her trouble him no more. ** Nay, then, if my lord wiU not hear me/'
me," said she, ** I must be gone; but hereafter, perhaps, you may repent for not listening to what I could unfold." She waved her wand and retired, followed by many, and amongst tlie rest Rosalva, whom she beckoned to a distant part of the garden; and when she thought tliey were unobservsd, said in whispers, " Ro¬ salva loves!" '* Whom?" said he, laughing. '* Rosalina St. Almo," He started—" You are then acquaint¬ ed with her real appeUation?" " That I am," she replied; J* for no¬ thing is unknown to the sorceress Mag- dal&ia!" " Then tell me," said he, struck by her mysterious manner, ** why was you so very importunate to the marquis?" •• To
"To tefl him thatl knoAv him," an- SAvered she. ** • " Of course you do, or you would not have been present at this entertainment, given by way of celebration of my birth." " I came not on that account," re^ turned she. " For Avhat purpose then do yoir come ?" " To AA r arn innocence pf "danger, and to save from destruction." "Ah! who is m danger?" inquired the eager youth. "Rosalina St. Almo!" answered she.: " Ah! from whom ?" * She Waved her hand, as if forbidding him to inquire. " Nay, if you are indeed what you pretend, which I feel, from what yoir have
have already said, half inclined to beUeve, leave me not unsatisfied. Tell me, I conjure yo%, tett me who is the person from AA r hom she is in danger? for my dagger shall drink the blood of that villain, Avho, by his cursed arts, would dais^to harm the angelic RosaUna!" " Yobr jlagger wiU neA^er reach the heart of that Avretch who basely seeks her Hfe," said she. " But it shall, I SAvear by all the—" " Hold!" commanded she. *• Swear not. Fate forbids the deed." " Wherefore ? What prevents me ?" " Because," continued she, laying her hand upon his arm, and fixing her eyes earnestly upon his, " that villain is the marquis di Barozzi, your father." On pronouncing this, she vanished amongst the trees, Avhile the petrified vouth,
youth, unequal to the task of foUowing, sunk upon a seat overpowered with hor¬ ror at the tenor of her departing words. He was quickly aroused by the ap¬ proach of Angelo Monturino, the noble¬ man who had interrogated him respect¬ ing Rosalina, who, coming briskly up 9 said, " WeU, has the sorceress told you any good things in regard to your future life ? I saw her leave you, so I came to *isk you what you think of her pre¬ dictions; but good Heavens!" added he, on beholding the ill-concealed agitation of Rosalva, " what is the matter? Surely you are not weak enough to sutler the pretended prognostic of a mask to affect you?" " Nay," said Rosalva, endeavouring to shake off his tremor, and force a smile, ** your supposition is wrong ; 'tis tlie fa¬ tigue
tigue of dancing and the oppressive heat that render me somewhat unwell;" then rising and taking the arm of the other f they returned to the palazzo, where they were joined by the marquis, and many of the guests, who, after spending the remainder of the night in sportive mirth, departed to their respective habitations. Rosalva, wishing to be alone, that he might ruminate with deliberation on the discourse he had with the unknown, but mysterious mask, availed himself of the first opportunity for withdrawing, and bidding his father and aunt a good-night* retired to his own apartment.
CHAP-
CHAPTER Vn. The Terrific Chamber. The marchioness, when alone with Rosa, asked her the meaning of the terror which she evinced at the sight ofthe fan¬ cied enchantress, which she explained as follows— " I was returning to the private path which leads to the palazzo, when I was accosted by the strange figure that your¬ self saw. She asked me if I should like to be made acquainted with my future destiny, and, without waiting for my re¬ ply*
ply, took my hand, which I reluctantly yielded. She looked at it with seeming earnestness, and saidj * Imprudent girl! why have you so unthinkingly, so rashly ventured to Venice ? Here lives your deadly foe, the implacable, mortal foe of Rosalina St. Almo. Hasten to La Rosa, for here the assassin's hand is once more lifted to destroy.' Slie then left me, and ghded down one ofthe walks, leaving me terrified almost to fainting. Signor Ro¬ salva happening to pass near rne, I re¬ quested him to conduct me to our apart¬ ments ; but he laughed at my fears, and said she was only supporting the charac¬ ter which she assumed. But, alas! ma¬ dam, it is evident by her accosting me by the name of St. Almo, and knowing that I had been in the power of assassins, that slie must be well acquainted with every
every circumstance of my life, or possest ses more than common knowledge." The marchioness was thunderstruck at this account, and exclaimed, " Good Heavens! we are betrayed! My child, you must immediately, to prevent the possibility of danger, return to La Rosa, for Avhoever this strange being can be, she must certainly mean you friendly. We AviU depart to-morrow; but first we must inform Rosalva of this mystery, which should not, even for a moment, be treated with neglect; therefore early in the morning I witt request his at¬ tendance ; and now, my love, seek some repose, that you may be able to set for¬ Avard with reneAved strength." Rosalina foUowed this Avholesome ad¬ vice, but could not profit by it. The mysterious Avords of the sorceress stiU mf sounded
-rounded in her ears, and if for a moment she closed her Avearied eyeUds, dreadful visions flitted before her disordered ima¬ gination, which harrassed her mind and prevented her rest. Earnestly did she pray that she might once more be at La Rosa, seated in the pavilion, by the side of her protectress the marchioness. \ "nable to sleep, she rose from the couch, and repairing to the AvindoAv, endeavour¬ ing to tranquiUize her feelings by gazing on the Avonderful works of the Creator, for all nature Avas hushed in solemn still¬ ness, save the fanning breeze Avafting iirough the trees that surrounded the varden, at intervals caused their trem¬ bling leaves to sendforth a rustling sound, vhich gave additional gloom to the ■thenvise silent scene. At length the uavu appeared, and soon as Aurora, Avith her
her empurpled rays, peeped through her casement, she adjusted her dress, and Avaited with anxiety the appearance of Paulina, avIio constantly attended to as¬ sist at her toilet, and conduct her to the apartment of the marchioness. The latter had rested nearly as ill as herself; and soon as she thought it con¬ sistent with decency to arouse Rosalva, had sent to his chamber, requesting a feAV moments conversation Avith him. He, alarmed and disturbed by occur¬ rences of the preceding night, had ne¬ ver retired to bed, but sat in silent me¬ ditation ; and on hearing the wishes of his aunt, instantly, Avithout demur, fol¬ lowed the messenger, "Rosalva," said she, soon as he was seat¬ ed, "Ave are betrayed. The strange mask that last night represented a sorceress, addressed
» addressed our Rosa by her real name, and told her that she was in the power of her mortal foes. I would not have you suppose from tliis that I am weak enough to be alarmed at what might be casually known, but other corroborating circumstances lead me to imagine that the mysterious mask must be acquainted with the intended act, and in friendship niight take this singular method to ap¬ prise her of the danger in which slie seems to stand; I am therefore deter¬ mined to quit Venice directly, as the most likely mode of safety." Rosalva coincided with the intentions of his aunt, of whom he tremblingly in¬ quired if the unknown had mentioned to Rosa the name of her foe ? The monosyllable ?w 9 restored him to tome degree of calmness. The
. The marchioness then continued, ** Poor child! she has been sorely perse¬ cuted! Accursed be the man, who, with unrelenting cruelty, can thus pur¬ sue innocence and virtue Uke hers! There is a hidden mystery in her fate Avhich I cannot develop. She cannot be the offspring of a peasant, or her life would not thus inhumanly be sought; add to whieh, she has a packet of letters, found in the drawer belonging to her fa¬ ther's cottage, and by him, I conjecture, addressed to hei mother, Avherein he signs himself by the title of marquis; but the name is erased, and no where to be found. The rich pearl also that she wears on her finger, is another proof of the rank which her parents must have possessed, and undoubtedly must have been deprived of by some deed of vil¬ lainy
lainy; but I trust, by the aid of boun¬ teous Providence, slie avUI one day at* tain that elevated station, her right by birth, and which her merit so justly der serves." "I trust $hewill," said Rosalva, sigh¬ ing at the ideal conviction that when he rescued lier from the hands of assassins, he had only saved her from a fate, Avhich, by being deferred, would fall the heavier on his heart; but endeavouring to shake off the unpleasant thoughts that clouded his mmd, almost to the. beAvUdering of his senses, he told liis aunt that he would escort them some distance on their jour* ney to La Rosa, and retired to prepare for that purpose. The marchioness and Rosa, after mak¬ ing proper arrangements, Avaited on the marquis to bid him adieu, vol, i. g He
He received the apology wliich his sis- ter -made for her afeitipfc departure with politeness, and again fixed his eyes on Jlosa, in a semtoixin^^^^ a painful manner. She shmmk ftom hm penetrating gaze, and^^ took the^earliest oppo*rtunity to quit tlie Sfdoon, «nd retiring to her apart- mentv waited i**^^ anxfety till she was joined I by Ae marehioness, whom the marquis for a cimsiderable time had held to-Miitrhm*^ -Jib gondola soon after was announced to be in readiness, and after the usual ceremonies,;<*h^ departed from Venice. ilo^a then began to feel a small de¬ gree of tranquillity, which increased ad the city^receded fton* their view. dR^>salva accompanied them a consider¬ able part of the way, and at the moment of
of separation, seemed as if bis heart would have burst He took leave of them in a very tender manner, and remained upon the spot until the carriage into whieh he had handed them oil quitting the boat* and which he accompanied on horseback for several leagues, was out of sight A heavy sigh from tiie inmost recess of his bosom passed his lips, as he <*ried, * Adieu, sweet Rosa? may guar¬ dian angels ever watch around thee; and with interposing aM ward off the threat¬ ened danger! Accursed be the hand, that, with wanton cruelty, would shed thy innocent blood! May withering pal- 4 sies unnerve the sanguinary arm of Hie murderous villain when uplifted against thy precious hfe! Ah, is not the man who persecutes thee unto death my fa¬ ther ! Dreadful, horrid thought! it cad g 2 never
Uever he! What authority have 1 for so thinking? the words of an unknown at a mask, no doubt an enemy to my pefree, aiid who used that artifice to make me misei*able. It must be so! My pa¬ rent never can be the mortal foe of any one, .much less that of an unoffending woman! But then the knowledge which the stranger evidently possesses relative to Rosa is sufficient to excite alarm in the breast of one less inchned to belief than myself. Yet it must be false; and my suspicions are base and unnatural. However, there can he no harm in being on the guard; on my return I will watch my father's conduct, and if possible come at the bottom of his heart, which I will fathom to its lowest depth." . Rosalva, buried in these reflections, did not perceive that his horse had de¬ viated
viated from the road, and strayed into the winding labyrinths of the adjoining forest. He checked the animal, and turn¬ ing about, endeavoured to retrace his steps, but unacquainted with thedifferent paths, he chose one wdiich led him fur¬ ther stiU astray. Finding itimpossibler- to regain the road, he looked around, to see if he could discover some woodman's hut, where he might inquire his way; but ere he could discern the sign of any habitation, the dusky shades of night came swiftly on, and casting a heavy gloom on the surrounding trees, (against the protruding branches of which he was every instant in danger of striking his head), obscured every object from sight, and rendered his advancing exceedingly dangerous. He now wished he hkd availed himself of the offer made by his o 3 aunt
aunt on their separation, who desired him not to return alone, but take with him one of her attendants, (for when he . set out to accompany her, he had ne¬ glected bringing any of his own), but he positively refused taking any of her reti¬ nue, saying he did not think it necessary* - as in a much-frequented road thert could be no danger. After slowly wandering for a consider* able time, his eager eye caught sight of $ friendly taper, whose feeble rays glim¬ mered through the darkness of the gloo¬ my night. His spirits reAaved, and dis¬ mounting from his horse, he took the j?f ins ia his hand, and endeavoured to explore the way (Avhich he did with dif¬ ficulty), towards the spot from whence he perceived the friendly sign of hospi* table shelter to tbe benighted traveller. On
On reaching the buUding, he was greatly surprised at not Sliding it, as he expected, the humble dweUing of the forest labourer, but the dUapidated re* mains of an ancient structure, resembHng a reUgious house, or castle. He was* astonished, for he never knew that the wood contained such a place; and from the sombre appearance it exhibited*, thought it might be the retreat of ruf¬ fians. The taper, that stiU shed, its faint beams from a Gothic window over the broken portico, served tbe purpose of shewing the entrance to this desolated ruin, and giving it a stUI more gloomy look. Rosalva stood undetermined whether to venture a knock at the gate, or remain in the open air amidst the cold and damp until the morning; but at length sum- g 4 * moning
moiling all his courage, he resolved to explore the place, let the danger be what it would. He therefore fastened his horse to a kind of old paUsado, whieh had bidden defiance to the power of time, (the effects of whose destroying hand were so obvious in every other part of the edifice), and ascending some Broken steps, advanced to the gate, to which he appUed his hand, to try whe¬ ther it was fastened, but on touching it, was surprised to find it yield to the sUghtest pressure, and flew invitingly open. The noise of its grating hinges sounded through a spacious vaulted pas¬ sage that presented itself to view, whieh he entered, guided by the light that shone from the heavy casement. At the end he perceived another door, which he tried with the same caution as the first, and it im mediately
BAROZZL immediately opened, as if by enchants ment. Adistant recedingfootstep caught his ear, whicli convinced him the place Avas inhabited by beings ofsome sort, and following the sound, he arrived at a spacious haU, in which was a branch of lights, standing on a table in the middle of the place. He moved towards them; but his foot trod upon something that r caused him to stumble, and feeling on the ground to learn what had thus caused him to faU, his hand touched some hard substance; he grasped hold of it, and.tak- ing it to the lights, perceived it was a- poniard. He started, and examining it more closely, he saAV engraven on the hilt the name of Augustino di Barozzi. Cold drops of perspiration bedeAved his forehead; his knees struck together, as with trembUng voice he cried, " My g 5 father i
fatherf Oh Heavens! my father too surely has been decoyed hither and base¬ ly murdered! The Virgin assist me to unravel this mystery, and revenge his death!" Ife drew his sword, and taking a can¬ dle from the branch, turned to an en¬ trance on the left. At the extremity was an arched door, which, as he opened, the chilly breeze that swept along the passage nearly extinguished the Ught. Shifting it with his hand, Rosalva ad¬ vanced with some difficulty through a corridor. The unwholesome damps, which stole in lachrymal drops down its slimy walls, proved that the cheering light of day never penetrated into this •*** {$foocmy jsecess. He advanced with great e/mrion, but found his progress impeded by a do«r strongly barricadped with mas-
sy bars of iron. He immediately. ap¬ pUed his utmost strength to remove them, which, after great labour, he effect¬ ed; then placing his hand on an iron ring which hung from the side, and pul¬ ling with aU his might, dragged it open. The rushing wind forcing its entrance through the space, extinguished the tight, and left him in total darkness. At that moment a loud discordant yeU broke the silence Avhich had before, in awfiil solemnity, reigned within the- walls of this decaying fabric. After a moment's pause, the shriek was repeated, and Rosalva, by his feelings nearly -wrought to desperation,plungedforward, at the hazard of mcurring the greatest danger* With his sword he explored hfe way along the damp mouldering waU, tiU he *was stopped by a wooden parti- o 6 tion*
tion, whicli exactly crossed his path; Striking it with his sword, it shook with the blow. This gave him hopes that It was a door, and feeling for the bolt, his hand passed across a secret spring, be¬ longing to a sliding pannel, which flew baek into a groove, and discovered to the astonished eye of Rosalva a sight that rivetted him to the spot. Twas the in¬ terior of a Gotliic chamber. In the dis¬ tant part was a bed,*, on winch lay ex¬ tended a form, clad in a long white robe, ;tpparently the corse of a female. In the centre stood a largeantique table, covered with black, on which lay various strange devices, and instruments of mystic shape. A lamp suspended from the ceiling gave a dismal light to this gMomy apartnient. Petrified with horror, and hardly con¬ scious of what he did, he instantaneously pushed
pushed the pannel to its former situa¬ tion, but suddenly stopped ere the secret spring had closed, to consider for a mo¬ ment how he should act. "Gracious God!" said he, u what horrid place is this? surely 'tis the habitation of some demon, and the fiends of hell meet here to perform their diabolical orgies, and dance their infernal revels as tliey qualf human blood. That female form which I behold no doubt is a victim sacrificed to their hellish rites, and perhaps my turn may be next. Dreadful thought! How shall I proceed? Best to retire till day ar¬ rives, probably then I may be able to ex¬ plore this den of wickedness with less danger." He was upon the point of retreating, but ere the spring could shoot into its place,
place, a loud groan struck upon his ear, which arrested his hand when in the very action of slipping the bolt, and ap¬ plying his eye to the crevice he had left between the pannel and the adjoining wainscot, a sight, even more terrible than the other, bereft liim of the power of moving- A door, at a distant part of the cham¬ ber, slowly unclosed, at which entered the identical sorceress he had beheld at Venice, followed by his father, who seem¬ ed to hold her in earnest conversation. Eosalva listened attentively, scarcely suffering himself to breathe, so fearful was he of losing a single word of the strange, incomprehensible dialogue which they held, unconscious of being seen or heard by mortal eye or ear. « I tell
" I tellyou, Barozzi, you are wong; let the girl perisli, and save yourself from disgrace." " She is so innocent," faltered the half- resolved marquis. " So was her father," repUed the hag, sternly. " Then she is sobeAvitchingly beautiful.*' " So was her mother," returned she; " and yet you murdered her!" Rosalva shuddered. " I thought you had already told me of my crimes," said the marquis, sternly; 14 why do you recapitulate the ungrate¬ ful theme ? WUl you assist me, if you possess the poAver, in removing this hate¬ ful serpent, that, phoenix-Uke, rises from the ashes intended to destroy her, and mars my peace?—Assist me, and com¬ mand my services." " Your
" Your services!" replied she, wi^th a ghastly smile; " I've before said, I scorn, I despise them! Think you a being who possesses the potent skill of magic will re¬ gard a mortal's promise? No! I seek not your favour/nor do I dread your anger. You are in my power, marquis? you have not the means to injure me, or I ha^ simk beneath the poniard you so lately levelled at my breast r butl have to punish you; therefore, if you wish to secure my friendship* sfcudy my pleasure, which may be gratified in giving to, me the blood of that girl. Promise faithfully that she shall be surrendered to mv mf }>ower, and I will offer her up a sacrifice to the deity I serve." " The deity you serve!" said the mar¬ quis, trembling, " and who is he ?" " Lucifer"
41 Lucifer? answered .she, w who is botli mine and yours." ' ' "Mine?" * ^ '* Yes, yours ; for he is the acknow¬ ledged deity of aU murderers." *' Then why should I be a murderer ?** asked he. " Are you not one already ? Think you the crimes committed sixteen years ago, are blotted from the page of Hea- A^en's judgment book? No. What have you done to expiate them ? What hast thou performed to obliterate or cancel tliose deeds, to suppose there is pardon for thee, Barozzi ?" The guilty marquis repUed not. " Shallow, thoughtless man ! Avhy, thou art sunk in sin beyond redemption; then pursue your Avill with¬ out remorse; banquet, glut on blood, and
and so prove good your title to the * future station you are doomed to fifl/* A yeU, more dreadful than the first that had assailed the ear of Rosalva, rang within the walls of this horrid fabric, whose vaulted roof re-echoed back the dreadful sound. The sorceress then wa- Aring with her right hand a wand in mys¬ tic circles round the room, and striking with her fook the floor in part gave way and sunk. A taU female figure, clad in a white robe, ascended, bearing in her hand a scroU,on which, in letters of blood, were written the words, " Mortal, be resolute, or RosaUna shaU inherit the ho¬ nours of Barozzi." The figure, after remaining for the space of a minute, descended. A loud yell, Uke the former, succeeded. . The floor
floor closed, and all remained as before, excepting the marquis, who, now frantic with despair, and turning to the hag, ex¬ claimed, " Is this true ?" She nodded assent " What, shall the child of Fer¬ nando inherit the honours of my house I No! it~shatt never be! Sooner wiH I compound with fiends to dweU with them for ever! She shall die ; I ara resolved I To-morrow, on my return, let me behold her breathless!" " Oh terrible!" loudly exclaimed Ro¬ salva. The marquis started aghast, while the cruel hag roUed her dark eyes around the room in wild affright. " What Avas that?" faltered he; " are Ave betrayed?" " It could be but fancy, nothing more," answered she; " then aAvay with fear
fear—avaunt all idle dreams! Barozzi, are you fuUy resolved ?" " I am!" exclaimed he; " let cowards 1 tremble at the voice that cries forbear! it shall not daunt me; for in despite of every thing I wiU assert my rights, and my son Rosalva, my family's fairest hope, shaU Uve secure, and fearless of liaving his fortunes tlasted by the offspring of Fernando!'* *' Never!" cried Rosalva, as he slipped baek the pannel; and leaping into the apartment, stood before the sight of tha terror-stricken Barozzi.
CHAP-
i
CHAPTER VIIL
The Retrogression. Rodolpo di Barozzi, father to the pre¬ sent marquis, was a nobleman of an ami¬ able disposition, whose riches were suffi¬ cient to keep pace with his generosity. Early in life <being left sole heir, with¬ out controul, to his father's possessions) he united liimself to a lady, who possess¬ ed great beauty in her person, sweetness in her temper, and great accomplish¬ ments in her manners and education, to Avhich Avas added an immense fortune, A year
A year passed on in great felicity ahd domestic happiness; at the end of that period she gave to the arms of her de¬ lighted husband two sons, at one birth. The twins equalled each other in love¬ liness, and even excelled the most san* guine expectations of the^r enraptured parents, who mutually endeavoured to rear tliem in the precepts and practice of virtue, to render thdr minds as engaging as their persons were interesting. Fernando was of a placid disposition*, possessing great suavity of manners, mid such appUcation to his studies, that he -surpassed in learning and tiie fine arts idl his competitors. Augustino was of a temper morose and envious; rude, but very artful. He did not aim at tlie possession of the ac¬ complishments necessary for a man of rank,
rank, yet covered the defect by an arti¬ ficial gloss in his manners. For learning he had an aversion, yet viewed tlie pio- gress made by his brother with inward mortification, and at every praise be¬ stowed upon Fernando, an envious dis¬ like, almost amounting to hatred, enter¬ ed his rancorous heart, whieh he had suf¬ ficient address to conceal, and appeared fond of him even unto dotage. So well did he play the hypocrite, if a word was spoken in sUght,or dispraiseof Fernando, he always espoused his cause, and be¬ came his warmest advocate; and by this means appeared not only to his parents, but to the world in general, a prodigy of goodness and fraternal love. In this manner, days, months, and years passed on,tiU the twins reaehed the age of maturity, when it was resolved by
by their fond parents they should make the tour of the principal pait of Europe, to gain by travellings knowledge ofthe world, indispensably necessary for all those intended to move in elevated sta* tions. * * Their first route was to France, where-, by the means of an ample aUowance from a fond indulgent father, they en¬ tered into aU the levity, extravagance, and dissipation, for which that country is noted. Femando's prudence restrained him from launching beyond the Umits of his purse; but Augustino possessed not the least foresight; and plunging headlong into folly, was often compeUed to be> eome petitioner for a loan, and to drcuv -on the generosity of his brother, whe liever refused granting the supply thong 1
though the applications were numerous. Their aUowances were equally ample, yet insufficient to support the excesses and boundless extravagance in which Augustino indulged. Gaming and drinking were his chief amusements; he also was a warm admirer of the fair sex; but not satisfied with the possession of gay and depraved women, (in whose so¬ ciety he spent the greatest portion of liis time), he sought, by his personal accom¬ plishments, alluring address, and insinu¬ ating manners, to seduce others, who, by their virtue and modesty, he ought to have esteemed and respected. Returning one evening from a soUtary walk in the fields adjacent to Paris, me¬ ditating how to retrieve a heavy loss he had the night before sustained a£ a ga- jning-table, regardless of his footsteps, vol. l h and
and buried in a deep reverie, he stumbled, and endeavouring to rise, found that he had sprained his foot seriously, whicli gave him excruciating pain, and render¬ ed him incapable of standing Avithout support. He was considering Iioav he might procure assistance, Avhen a gentle voice saluted his ear with " Pray, mon¬ sieur, aUoAv me to help you." Turning his head, he perceived close to him a lovely peasant girl. Augustino forgot his anguish, while with licentious appetite he gazed on her fair form and enchanting face. She re¬ peated her offer of assistance, and accept¬ ing her ann, he arose, and made an effort to walk. She led him along Avith great tenderness, while he examined minutely the person and appearance of his fair con¬ ductress. Her
Her stature Avas ofthe middle size, and proportionable to her shape, Avhich was truly graceful, and rendered exceedingly interesting by the neatness of her dress, whieh consisted of a broAAm jacket, tied up the front with azure blue ribbons, a short petticoat, of the same stuff, Avhich displayed one of the prettiest pair of feet and taper ancles in all France. On her head she Avore a large straw hat. tied under the chin Avith a pink handker¬ chief, Avhose broad slouch shaded a pair of line dark eyes, that rolled languish- ingly beneath ringlets of glossy black. Augustino vieAved her with rapture, and from that time singled her out as a fit victim to gratify his inordinate desires. With an insinuating voice he inquired if there Avas not a cottage near, where he might rest till he coidd send to tlie city ii 21 for
for a carriage, as he found it impossible to proceed much farther? " My mother lives hard by, monsieur, though she is at present gone out; but you shall have the best accommodation our humble dwelling affords" This was joyful news to the depraved youth, who raising her hand gallantly to his Ups, returned her his acknowledge¬ ments in the most graceful manner. The pressure alarmed the innocent girl, yet she did not withdraw it; feel¬ ings both of shame and gratification caused the mantling colour to rush in her face; a trembling seized her whole frame, insomuch that she could scarcely support herself. This he perceived, and was resolved for the present to be less ardent; then resuming a degree of nonchatance, said his
his foot pained him inexpressibly, and asked how much farther was the cottage? " It's close by, monsieur," replied the artless girl, and immediately, from be¬ hind a clump of trees, it met their view —that happy, humble dwelling, where the peasant Marian had spent fifteen years of innocence and peace. Ah, wretched maid! why did thy guar¬ dian angel sleep?—why did he not whis¬ per that thou wert leading to a mansion of cheerfulness and content thedesolating fiend, who, by triumphing o'er thy vir- tue, would mar all thy future days? No more shalt thou, in harmless mirth, dance to the sweet enUvening notes of the rustic pipe; but, hke the withering rose-bud, plueked from its stem by a wanton hand ere it hath reaehed its growth, thy lovehness sliall fade and . H 3 die;
die; the canker grief shaU feed upoft thy cheek, and baneftilly destroy thy ripening sweetness. A feAV steps brought them tb the door, and Marian, puUing up the latch, ad¬ mitted her guest. The neatness and simplicity of the dAveUing, ornamented with homely fur¬ niture, Avhose greatest recommendation Avas its cleanUness, proved at once the humble state of its industrious inmates. Marian drew forth an arm-chair, and wiping the dust from it with a napkin, entreated the stranger to be seated; theri reaching a stool, and placing on it a patch-work cushion of curious and in¬ genious Avorkmanship, begged he Avould rest his foot ori it till she could go and procure some one to send for a carriage. Augustino surveyed every action of % his
hi& fair hostess Avith delight; but while she flew for means to alleviate his pain, he AA-as planning maeliinations for her> destruction. The unsuspecting girl shortly return¬ ed, informing him she had procured & neighbouring viUager to take his mule and go to Paris for a carriage—"But Avho must he inquire for, monsieur, Avhen he arrives at your residence ?" " Let him go to any hotel that he pleases, or bring one from any place ha may think fit," ansAA r ered he. " Very well, monsieur," ansAvered she, rather disappointed, as she Avished to learn the name of her guest. She thought him handsome. "Ah, I wonder if he is married; should he be so, Iioav very happy must be madame his wife!" H 4 Thus
Thus thought the innocent, unsophis¬ ticated Marian, while she hardly dared trust her eyes to wander towards him, lest they should betray the secret of her mind. Augustino stiU kept gazing on her with longing eye; and she, to escape from his earnest regards, went into the garden, and from a luxuriant vine, whose mantting branches formed a rural alcove, plucked a choice bunch of grapes, which placing with some leaves upon one of their best earthen plates, with a low curtsey she offered to his accep¬ tance. He ate two or three, and highly praised their flavour: " But how," added he, " can they be otherwise, pruned as they are,no doubt, by thehandof aHebe." " I manage the trees myself, mon- sieur.' 5 "It
** It was to you I aUuded," said he, smiting at her simplicity. " My name is Marian," said she, Avith an enchanting naivete. " Then my conjecture was right, and the rearer of those deUcious graphs is more beautiful than she who fiUs the cup for Jupiter/ 5 Marian did not comprehend the mean¬ ing of this, but guessing it was a compli¬ ment, and finding that he thought her handsome, it gratified the uncorrupted heait of the simple unschooled girl, who began to think the stranger exceedingly captivating. Time past on unheeded by either par¬ ty—Augustino never tired with gazing on her beauty, and Marian, though greatly embarrassed in his presence, find¬ ing a charm in his society for Avhich she H 5 coidd
could not account. Often did she run to the window, to see if the expected carriage was ih sight, and Avhen she did not perceive it, a secret pleasure diffused through her bosom at the idea that the stranger must reinain some time longer beneath the cot. At length the unwelcome sound of wheels announced its approach, and Au¬ gustino drawing forth his purse, offered her a piece of gold, Avhich she, Avith a Ioav curtsey, modestly decUned accepting, saying she desired no reAvard fot any as¬ sistance she had been able to render— " But, monsieur, as you are so very po¬ Ute, aflow me to receive it for the pur¬ pose of bestoAving it on my poor neigh¬ bour Pierre, who now lies sick, with a family of three eMdren,and a Avife incap¬ able of labour." " Then
" Then be it so," said he; "but you must accept tliis ring," at the same time taking it from his finger, "and when you look upon it, sometimes think of Augus¬ tino di Barozzi." " Oh, my lord," said she, " why will you force upon me a thing of so much value? Alas ! there needs not a remem¬ brancer on the finger of Marian, whUe one remains in her heart? " What!" said the joyful libertine, pleased Avith his conquest, "wiU you treasure the recollection of me in your breast ?—Shall I be esteemed by you ?— .Will you indeed sometimes think on me ?" " I shaU indeed, my lord," answered she, in great confusion, as the com-ietion of her having expressed more than her n 6 modesty
modesty should have aUowed, shot across her guileless bosom. lie, in raptures at this confession, pressed her hand to his lips, saying, " Then Marian wiU not accept the ring?' " No, my lord, excuse me if I say I will not; but if it is your wish I should take any thing, be not angry at my re¬ quest ; but I—" She stopped, and ti¬ midly raised her eyes to his, unable to give utterance to her wish. " What is it ?" said he; " I promise that------ n " Then suffer me to take a small lock of your hair, and Avhen yoa are far dis¬ tant— how—r-~" her voice faltered, and a starting tear gemed her silken eye¬ lash, " ah, how often shaU I think of the day when it was my happy lot to af¬ ford you assistance!" « SAveet
<£ Sweet girl r* said he, when the sim¬ ple Marian had named her wish, " why make so many words about so worth¬ less a trifle? Take it, and perhaps, ere I return to Venice, we may meet again." " Indeed !" said she, at the same time applying the opening clasp of her seissars to separate the treasure of her fancy, " shall I then once more behold you ?" " Do you wish to see me again, dear Marian ?" said he, as his large dark eyes encountered hers. *' Do you wish to see me again?" repeated he, and his polluted lips pressed hers. She withdrew in alarm and anger, co¬ vered with crimson blushes; but reco¬ vering herself, and restraining her rage, exclaimed, " My lord, I beseech you to depart; your carriage is ready, and I en¬ treat
treat you will go, ere my mother returns, whom I uoav every minute expect" " Say then you forgive me/" perceiv¬ ing she had delicacy to fed, and resolu¬ tion to resent the insult he had offered to her modesty. " Wont you forgive me, IMarian ? I cannot leave you tili you have sealed my pardon." He gent¬ ly took her hand, and dreAV her towards him, "Will you drive me to despair, by resenting an error committed in a moment of rashness and unthinking pre¬ sumption ?" She sighed. His lips again met hers, and Marian did not chide. He asked if he might repeat his visit ? She could not refuse, and assisting him to ascend the carnage, saAV him seated, and in a moment after beheld his departure with half-smothered reluctance. Her eyes foUoAved
followed the receding vehicle, and Avhen her listening ear eould no longer catch a sound of its SAvift-moA'ing wheels, she sunk on a chair, and burst into tears; then looking on the lock of hair, vs hich she had twisted round her finger, ex¬ claimed, " Ah, how soft and pliant!—» How beautiful is the colour!-—What a glossy jet it is! Oh, I will never part Avith it! I will braid it Avith some of my own, and Avear it next my heart!" Thv heart! Ah, fond, but credulous girl! thy heart had fied in company Avith Barozzi; he bore it triumphantly r-Avay; thou, unknown to thyself, hast bestoAvcd it on one, who, in return for a gift so precious, will inflict upon it the dreadful pangs of guilt and remorse. The SAveet balm of peace no more shall visit it, until the mouldering sod which is to cover thy humble
humble grave shall bury in oblivion tlie sad remembrance of all thy misery and thy shame!
CHAT
CHAPTER IX.
The Seduction. While Augustino was thus planning the seduction of the innocent Marian, his brother Fernando was otherwise em¬ ployed. He had met at the court of France a nobleman called De Valmont, who stood high in the estimation of his royal mas¬ ter ; but on the failure of a long-concert¬ ed plan of great importance, on wliich the interest of the state greatly depend¬ ed, his enemies threw the whole blame upon
upon him, and poisoned the ear of the king by exclaiming against his proce¬ dure, saying that De Valmont (who was principal in the negotiation) had pre¬ vented success, from motives that were self-interested, and that by his bad admi¬ nistration alone the project had failed. 'Twas in vain he pleaded guiltless of the charge. His enemies were nume¬ rous; they had long beheld his increas¬ ing favour with their sovereign with envv, were therefore determined to crush him on the first opportunity, and this being a favourable one, were unani¬ mous in advising his majesty to deprive him of the offices he held; to which the king consented, though with reluctance; and De Valmont in consequence was stripped of his dignity, aud banished the court. Disgusted
Disgusted of an ungrateful nation, that made such an ill return for aU his faith¬ ful services, he formed the resolution of quitting his native country for ever, and finishing the remainder of his days under a government less prejudiced than his own. Tliis determination he imparted to Fer¬ nando, who, commiserating his unhappy lot, pointed out Italy as the most likely place for esteeming merit and rewarding talent, at the same time assuring him of the countenance and support of his la¬ ther, who, in possession of great influ¬ ence, might be able to recommend him to the notice of the Venetian RepubUe. De Valmont returned his warmest ac¬ knowledgments for this solid proof of his friendship, which he should ever es¬ teem, but declined entering into the ser¬ vice of any state, as he had resolved to retire
retire froni the bustle and commotion of the busy World, and seek for peace and content beneath a humble - shelter— " There," said he, " blest with the SAveet endearing society of my daughter, whom I will teach to despise the empty titles of pomp and greatness, she shall live in retirement, free from the vices and in¬ trigues of courts, like the floAveret of the AaUey, Avhich sheds its fragrant perfume, then Avithers on its native stalk, unpluck- ed by the cruel hand of tyrant man. So shaU pass my future days; and when it pleases high Heaven's will to call me to my forefathers, 1 can yield my breath with the sweet reflection of possessing a conscience uncorrupted and free from sin." Fernando's heart bounded as De Val¬ mont mentioned his daughter—the love-
ly Rosalina, who then was about the age of eighteen. Beautiful, virtuous, and innocent, he had several times beheld her at different places where he visited, and had become deeply enamoured; but as he was averse to disobedience, and know¬ ing that his father had peremptorily fix¬ ed upon his espousing the heiress of Memni, a rich Venetian, he never dis¬ closed his passion to Rosalina, or tp her father, whose pride he knew wonld never descend to consent to a private marriage for his daughter, whom he thought, and with justice, would not disgrace the first family in France by an alliance; and in his prosperity he had refused several suitors, who had become candidates for her hand, not being of birth or rank equal to his wish, or not proving agree¬ able in the eyes of Rosalina. In
In a few days after, they left France, in search of a peaceful asylum in another country more grateful than their own. Fernando separated from De Valmont with regret, as he entertained a real friendship for the unhappy noble, who promised to write to him at Venice, v/hen he had fixed upon his future resi¬ dence. The gentle Rosalina sighed an adieu : the tears gushed from her lovely eyes. and with a sorrowful lieart she threw her¬ self back into the carriage. She was no philosopher; she could not tear herself from those scenes of childhood, rendered dear bv manv a tender recollection, with- » » out feeling the most poignant sensations of grief. Her departure quite unmanned Fer¬ nando ; in spite of all the resolution he endeavoured
endeavoured to summon, his fortitude forsook him, and he was incapable of pronouncing a farewell; and when the ve¬ hicle drove off, a heart-breaking sigh burst from his agitated breast, and remaining on the spot from where the unhappy exiles departed, his eyes bedewed with starting tears, foUowed them until the last glimpse appeared in view ; then re¬ tiring to his apartment, threw himseif upon a couch, -and strove to conquer those emotions wiiich were excited by pity and by love. When his feeUngs were in some measure tranquillized, he seriously reflected on the passion he en¬ tertained for the daughter of his friend, and thinking it might be productive of unhappiness, as he was not at liberty to espouse her, entered into a determina¬ tion of smothering his flame. This re¬ solution
solution was no sooner formed than bro¬ ken. Love, though said to bind with a silken tie, throAvs adamantine chains round its captives, and had entered so deep into Fernando's heart, that he found it impossible for him ever to Aved ano¬ ther. Sometimes he Avas half inclined to acquaint his father with the subject, but was preA r ented by the conviction of uneasiness it would giA r e that tender parent, who he knew had fixed his very soul on the union Avhichhe had proposed; and hoAVCA r er indulgent in other respects, in this AA T ould prove inflexible. His reAerie Avas interrupted by the appearance of La Motte, his brother's French valet-de-chambre, saying his master requested his presence as early as possible Avithout inconvenience. "What! is Augustino Ul?" asked he. " Yes.
** Yes, my lord," answered the other, with a cringing bow; " he has sprained his ancle severely, and is scarcely able to move." Fernando, on hearing this, started up immediately in great anxiety, (for he tenderly loved his brother), and hasten¬ ing to his hotel, found him with his foot supported on a cushion, apparently in extreme pain, at which he expressed great concern, and offered liis condo¬ lence, Augustino thanked him for his tender¬ ness, and said, " It is not this I regard. another misfortune touches me nearer, wherein my honour may be called in question, and I sent for you purposely to know if you will befriend me?" Si You know I will,'* replied his bro¬ tlier, rt therefore why do you ask? 1 * VOL. I. I « ljr a y h
** Nay," said Augustino, " I never doubted your friendship, but I've applied to you for assistance so often, that it would not be surprising if you declined it now." " My dear brother," said Fernando, " no more of that, but inform me of what causes your uneasiness, which, if I can aUeviate it, wiU make me happy." " Why, then, to the point at once. Two nights ago, I lost at play five hun¬ dred crowns more than I possess, and which I promised to pay on this very day. WiU you lend me the sum?" Fernando started—" Is it possible !" said he, with some degree of acrimony; ** how can you game so deeply ? For shame, thus to outrun our dear father's liberaUty! Why do you not refrain ?" " I did not send for you," said Augus¬ tino,
tino, pettishly, " to tell me of my faults ~-the question is, wiH you assist me?** " I have already promised," said the amiable Fernando; " but it shaU be for the last time, under circumstances Uke the present; for if you still persist hi plunging in foUy, you must excuse me if I decttne supporting it. Be not offended with me, for I intend not to reproach you; but the repeated drafts you have made upon my purse, I cannot much longer support; of this you must be AveU aware." " WeH, avcH," returned Augustino, "you are all goodness; and when my alloAvance is next remitted from Venice, I avUI repay you/* " Nay, I look not for that," said Fer¬ nando ; " you are freely welcome to it, and to all that I possess, provided it is 1 2 expended
expended in causes more worthy." Thus saying, he retired, and immedi¬ ately dispatched a messenger with the required sum. Augustino received it with a degree of thankfulness, and muttering to him¬ self, said, w This prudent, moral brother of mine lias always money, when I am poor and needy." " Ah, my lord," said the insinuating valet, " monsieur Fernando has not the generosity as you have, my lord." " You flatter me, La Motte." " No, my lord, indeed I don't, for you game like a prince, and love the ladies, to whom you are very liberal. So does monsieur Fernando love the ladies too; but then he has not the noble spirit which you have, my lord." " How
" Hoav do you knoAV that my brother loves the ladies ?" " Oh, I know, my lord, he loves the daughter of De Valmont, the exiled marquis." " Indeed! What, the pretty Rosa¬ Una ?" " Ah, my lord, she is indeed pretty, and I think she loves monsieur Fernando in return; but then she has never seen your lordship, else I think she Avould not; for if I Avas a Avoman, I know which I should prefer." The vanity of Augustino was gratifi¬ ed by the flattery of his valet, though he was AveU acquainted w T ith his character and morals, which Avould scruple at no vice or sin to please his employers. He once had figured in the capacity of a I Ji gambler^
gambler, but finding himself in danger from being detected in the act of playing with false dice, he forsook that vocation, and took to the less honourable office of a pander to those who chose to employ him, A famous libertine count had kept him long in his service; but wishing to get rid of him, recommended him strong¬ ly to the notice of Augustino, who found him an exceeding useful tool and proper iconfidant in all affairs of intrigue. To this wretch he unfolded his adventure with Marian, and concluded by saying, " La Motte, cannot you officiate as a priest in this business? for I find she is not to be obtained on common terms. Money she would not accept at any rate, therefore a sham marriage is the most feasible method of possessing her, on which
Avhich I am determined; but can you play the part properly ?—Can you keep your countenance ?" " Can I, my lord! ah, that I can; only ask my late master the count; I married him to at least five wives whilst in his s-^rvice; and I defy him to say that I ever laughed once, except in my sleeve, my lord. But why should not I be able to confine my joy within my clerical robes, when I am paid for it, as weU as many old hypocrites I have seen, who, Avith serious faces, and joyous hearts, unite couples in the bands of wed¬ lock, that is, to give them a lawful right to make each other miserable? Ah, my lord," added he, " many a fair creature, after enjoying the blessings of wedlock for a month, would leap out of tlieir skins for joy, if she knew the cler? 14 gyman
gyman was no other than your humble servant La Motte, and that she was free to seek another husband where she chose —don't you think so, my lord ?" " Indeed you argue the point Kke a true philosopher," repKed the dejKghted Augustino; " I can't help admiring tke soundness of youi* doctrine; and soon as this foot of mine enables me to move, I will again seek the pretty cottager." With this laudable resolution he re- tired to*his chamber, attended by the vil¬ lainous La Motte, a fit associate for his so truly abandoned, unprincipled lord. In the mean time,poor Marianno longer happily carolled forth her songs as she turned her wjieel, or trimmed her vines —no longer sunk in calm repose upon her humble couch; balmy sleep had for¬ sook her pillow, and the pale lily usurp¬ ed
ed the place of the damask rose, which once bloomed on her Hebe's cheek. Her garden was neglected, her fruit trees un- pmned; and lier flowers, unrefreshed by the watering pofs cooUng drops, and scorched by the meridian sun, seemed, like their mistress^fast faUing into decay. Her mother viewed this change with grief and Avonder. She kneAV not of the *Tj stranger's visit, for Marian, conscious of her partiality, had never mentioned his name, lest her tongue might betray the secret which fed upon her lieart. Nightly she visited the spot Avhere she first beheld him. "'Twashere," she AA r ould exclaim, as the tears started to her eyes, " that I first beheld him! He thanked me so kindly ; I shall neA'er forget it! then he gave me a lock of hair, to keep as a re¬ membrance/* She would then take it 15 from
from her bosom, where she constantly wore it, press it to her lips, then replacing it, would breathe a sigh, return home, and throwing herself upon her once-wel- eome couch, pass the night in thinking of her soul's adored. One evening, about a fortnight after she had beheld the interesting stranger, repairing to her accustomed place of pri¬ vate meditation, she seated herself at the foot of a tree, unheedful ofthe shades of night, which were gathering fast around, when taking the Jock, and returning it as usual, she exclaimed, " Shall I never again behold the giver of this precious jewel? will he never more return?" then with her eye bent on vacancy, sunk into a train of thought. A sigh which broke near aroused her, and turning round, she beheld at her el- btfw
bow the libertine Barozzi. She started, and would have fled, but he, catching her hand, gently detained her. " Will Marian shun me ?" said he. " Are you not glad to see me again ?—Did I not promise to return? Come, my sweet girl, you must not leave me !—But you look pale; are you iU ?" " I am, my lord," said she, tremulous¬ ly, as she suffered him to lead her to¬ wards the neighbouring grove. The pale moon faintly glimmered through the flitting clouds; no sound disturbed the silence of the night, save a gentle rustling of the trees, which waved in murmurs to the passing breeze —" Allow me, deai* Marian, to converse with you for a few moments uninter¬ rupted," said he, seating her on a grassy bank, and placing himself beside her. 1 6 Sha
She trembled, and cried, "My lord, suffer me to return home; my motlier wiU be alarmed at my absence—I be¬ seech you let me go." < "Hold!" said he, detaining her, "A\*ili not Marian listen to the man wlio loves her ?" " That loves me! Ah, my lord, that's impossible! You cannot love one so poor, so humble as myself." " Indeed I do; and the pain I have endured since I first beheld you is im¬ possible to describe; and, had I not been prevented by lameness, (Avhich I bless as the ineans of my first beholding you), long since Avould have sought you to de¬ clare my passion, Avhich, if you wUl re¬ turn, you shall accompany me to Venice, and be mine for ever." * " Yours,
" Yours, my lord! But Iioav ?" said she. * My a\ Ife." - " Your Avife! Shall I be your wife ?" " You shaU; dear, enchanting girl !'** said he, catching her in his arms. His cheek met hers,gloAving with fear and love. The sacred title of wife, which he sAvore she should bear, oppress¬ ed her senses with too-powerful a joy. Her heart for a time ceased to beat; she fainted; he triumphed, and poor Ma¬ rian Avas lost for ever. On her recovery, he eombatted her re¬ proaches, soothed her fears by a reneAval of his oaths; then seeing her nearly home, left her to become a prey to sorroA\\ remorse, and misery.
CHAP-
CHAPTER X. The Fratricide* Augustino exulted in the accomplish¬ ment of his heUish purpose; and from that night, so fatal to the peace of poor Marian, he avoided meeting her as much as possible. His passion noAV was cooled; he found the endearing caresses of that deluded innocent were becoming irk¬ some, and only wished for a plausible pre¬ tence by Avhich he might break a con¬ nexion groAvn troublesome, and almost disagreeable. Such
Such is the end of libertine amours! Pleased only with variety, the idcious seducer soon despises his victim, then basely deserts, and leaves it to the world's scorn, and the reproaches of a guilty conscience!" He Avas reUeved from this dttemma by the arrival of a letter from Venice, Avherein his father commanded the re¬ turn of his sons, before they had finished their intended tour. Augustino obeyed the summons Avith alacrity; and without the least remorse, or even breathing a sigh, he quitted France, in company with his brother, leaving Marian a prey to the horrors of poverty, infamy, and the pangs of disap¬ pointed love! J Tis true, he went to take leave of her, and promised she should soon hear from Imn; but that promise he
he had no intention of performing; but repUed to her earnest desires of accom¬ panying him, that his father was iU, and his journey must be performed without a moment's delay. She was forced to accept his excuses, and saw him depart with a heart almost bursting with grief. The brothers^ after a safe journey,, ar¬ rived at Venice, when their father com¬ municated to them his reasons for de¬ siring their return, " 'Tis for the pur¬ pose of fulfiUing a desirable plan, long since meditated, of seeing my sons, ere I may be called from this transitory Me" said be, " united by honourable alli¬ ances. The ducca di Centurani has a daughter, Avhom I propose as a wife for Augustino. Her father has accepted you for her husband, and highly ap¬ proves of you for his.son-in-laAv, there¬ fore
fore notliing is wanting but your com¬ pliance—Is it agreeable to you ?—Will you consent, my son ? ,r - The dutiful youth bowed, and hug¬ ging himself in the idea of her great dowry, which he fancied he had aheady in his grasp, said, that whatever his father wished, he was, and ever should be, proud to obey. His father expressed his pleasure at his seeming filial affection, and address¬ ing Fernando, said, " My child, Victoria of Memni is to be your wife;" (he shud¬ dered, for Rosalina at that instant crossed his recollection); "but she has soUcited her father, frpm what motive I know not, to defer the marriage ceremony un¬ til slie arrives at the age of twenty, and two years are Avanting to complete that number. Her father has consented te her
her wish; therefore, my child, you must wait the arrival of the period when you may call her yours, with patience." This inteUigence lifted a load from the heart of Fernando, who was deUghted at the idea ofthe marriage being deferred; but conceating his joy, bowed assent. A few weeks after, Augustino, forget* fid of his vows to Marian, led his fair bride tq the altar, and at the end of nine months Rosalva first saw the Ught. His birth was celebrated with great rejoicings, and Augustino doted on his boy to distraction; yet did his love not extend to a proper parental fondness, by making for him a proper provision, but continuhig to mix in abandoned compa¬ ny, lost such heavy sums, that not only his lady's fortune Avas expended, but his own become seriously injured. In
In the mean tiwe, Fernando had seve¬ ral times visited De Valmont in his se¬ clusion, and at a proper opportunity dis¬ closed to RosaUna his ardent passion. She returned his flame with mutual love, and at last consented to a private mar- riage, which was consummated unknown to any one save a single confidential wit¬ ness. Fernando shortly after took leave of his lovely bride, to avoid discovery. At a suitable interval he again visited the cottage of De Valmont, but was suddenly catted away by receiving inteUigence of the serious indisposition of both his fatlier and mother. He hastened to Ve¬ nice, and found them confined to their beds by a malignant fever, which, in a short time, proved fatal to both. On the marquis's AviU being examined, it
it appeared that Augustino had received great part of his patrimony, therefore Fernando became entitled to a much larger fortune than himself, to his great indignation and utter confusion; for it never once entered his thoughts that his father would deduct the sums, whieh, unknown to his brother, he had often re¬ ceived, but at his death make an equal division of his immense property. A proviso was mentioned, that if Fernando should die without wife or issue, liis for¬ tune should devolve to the son of Au¬ gustino. This he reflected on with gloomy pleasure. " Fernando," thought he, " probably may have no children— perhaps never marry! and if he should die, why then------" His meditation was interrupted by the appearance of a servant, who came to an¬ nounce
nounce the dangerous situation of his brother. He was in a state of delirium, having been suddenly seized with that raging disorder that had so fatally proved its baneful influence on his hapless pa¬ rents. Augustino started—" Let every eare be taken of him ; let no advice be want¬ ing." The attendant left the room. " If he should die !" ejaculated he; '• if he should die!" A feeling of joy shot through his guilty breast, as he hoped for his brother's dissolution. Fifty times a- day did he send to his chamber; the re¬ ports equalled his wicked expectations; the physicians had given hini over, and his death was hourly expected. Augustino exulted, and, in fancy, was counting over the possessions which must fall to him, when lo! to his asto¬ nishment
mshment and utter confusion, nature triumphed over disease, and Fernando was pronounced out of dange^, to the gieat joy of every one else who knew him. A change like this, so sudden and un¬ expected, almost overcame the prudence and forbearance of Augustino, but smo¬ thering his disappointment as well as he was able, beneath a veil of hypocrisy, he congratulated his brdther on his conva¬ lescent appearance, which he said gave him indescribable delight Fernando thanked him for his profes¬ sions of fraternal love, and said, " Had I died, there are others, my dear brother, would have regretted my loss*" " No doubt," said the other; " for the marquis di Barozzi is beloved by all." " You do not, I perceive, comprehend me,
me, brother," repUed Fernando; "my meaning is, I should have left a wife to lament my loss." " A wife! a wife!" reiterated the other in great astonishment; " are you married ?" " Yes, my dear Augustino; I have been married these ten months." " Indeed! and who is your wife ?" asked he. " RosaUna De Valmont," answered Fernando,at the same time saying, "you must pardon me for having concealed it from your knowledge tiU now," " Had our fatlier known it," said Au¬ gustino, " I think he would have disin¬ herited you for marrying without his consent, and knowing that he had pro¬ vided a wife for you." " Doubtless," answered Fernando, "he
'* lie might have made some difference in my fortune at least, which was my \ chief motive for keeping it a profound secret; for why should I wrong my wife and child, which I might have done by disclosing it before?" 44 Your chdd! have you then a child?" eagerly inquired Augustino. *' I have" 1 , at least I suppose so, for when I left Rosalina, she was far advan¬ ced in pregnancy; and I hope on my re¬ turn to the cottage to see an heir to my estates." " By whom was vou married ?" inter- rogatei Augustino. ik By him that was once our tutor— the good father Nicholas, who, alas! is now no more. I prevailed on him, by my entreaties, to jom our hands. He accompanied me to the vaUey adjacent the
the cottage, where he remained un¬ known, till I caUed for him, as De Val¬ mont was unacquainted with our loves. and ignorant of our nuptials." "And is he so stiU ?" " He is; but as soon as my strength permits, I shaU go and claim RosaUna as the marchioness di Barozzi: but perhaps lier father ere this is acquainted witli our union, for 'tis now three months smce I saw her, of course then her situation must have caused her to reveal it; there¬ fore, my dear brother, I must request you to forward this letter," at the same time giving one into his hands, " which, by your commands, wiU be expedited; it will explain to her the cause of my absence, and remove the uneasiness she no do.ubt labours under," Augustino took the letter, promising vol. i. K to
to see his ivishes performed. He then retired, after bidding his brother be com¬ posed, and Avithdrawing to his oaaii apartment, vented, in curses and exe¬ crations, the bitterness of his disappoint¬ ment. Glancing by accident his eyes upon the letter, he saw it directed for RosaUna, marchioness di Barozzi. A ba- siUsk could not have been more painful to his sight. " Marchioness di Barozzi!" exclaimed he, in a liorrid voice; " dam¬ nation ! Then aU hopes for me and mine are vanished! Demons of hell, assist me ! sai r e me from disgrace! and let me not be a brother's grovelling slave — an elder brother, who, by coming into the world a few minutes before me, possesses so great a superiority!" The fiends he invoked obeyed his summons, for at that moment a plan so liorrid
horrid struck his thoughts, that nothing but internals could have engendered in the brain of man. He struck his fore¬ head in gloomy joy, and pacing the room with hurried steps, exultingly cried, " It shaU be so! The priest who joined their hands is dead, and none else, that I need fear, can ever prove it!—' Excellent thought! The dignities of Ba¬ rozzi wiU then be mine, and my son shall hereafter inherit his father's rights—my rights! for had my father known of this disgraceful marriage, without doubt he would have settled on me what now, through ignorance of his derehction from duty, is Fernando's " Thus determined upon his diabohcal project, he opened the letter, and read the contents, which were tender in th3 extreme. With indignation he threw K& it
it in the flames, and penned another, cal¬ culated to rend the heart of Rosalina. It was couched in the following words :— " The dying Fernando greets Rosalina; and as the shades of dissolu¬ tion gleam before his closing eyes, he ex¬ erts his last remaining strength in unbur¬ dening his guilty soul, by disclosing, ere he dies, a painful truth. 1 am a villain! a base villain ! You are not my wife! I have deceived you with a forged mar¬ riage. The wretch who performed the ceremony was no priest, but, Uke my¬ self, a monster, joined in a plot to im¬ molate your innocence in the arms of a deceiver! He has already gone to a place where all his deeds will meet their re¬ ward. I shall quickly follow, to answer for
for my perfidy to you, of AA-hieh I noAV heartily repent, and wish I could atone for my offence; but to you that can be of no aA T ail; the deed cannot he recalled. FareAveU, Rosalina! pray for, and do not curse, the guilty " Ferxaxdo/* This, as it Avas a close imitation of his brother's characters, he did not doubt it would fully convince tlie AATetched girl Fernando was the villain which he had depicted; and applauding himself for the deception, summoned his faithful minister I ^ Motte, to ivhom he found it necessary to impart his villainous pro¬ ject, and giving him directions Iioav to act. dispatched this miscreant with the forgery, and then returned to the chain- K 3 her
ber of his brother with an air of perfect composure, teUing him he had sent a courier with the letter according to his desire. Fernando thanked him, and said, " Poor RosaUna! it AviU give peaee to her heart, which must be torn Avith anx¬ iety, and compose her feelings tiU we meet again." Augustino could scarcely conceal the diabolical pleasure which gleamed in his eyes at the seeming success of his vil¬ lainous stratagem, and his brother's sim¬ plicity. The evening on which La Motte re¬ turned from his heUish embassy, he en¬ tered the chamber of his sick brother with apparent great concern, saying the impatience of Rosalina had caused her .tp set forth immediately, accompanied only
only by the messenger; but the carriage breaking doAvn about a league distant in the forest, and being slightly wounded by the accident, was compeUed to remain behind, while the servant came forAvard for assistance. Fernando hearing the danger of his Rosalina, instantly forgot liis OAvn weak¬ ness, and set out with La Motte to her immediate relief. Thus he fett, as Avas expected, into the artful snare prepared for him by his cruel, bloody brother. Night had spread her sable mantle over the heavens ere they reached the forest, AAhich, when they entered, at an appointed spot, the villain La Motte pretended to stumble, and loudly groan¬ ing, as if he Avas hurt, Fernando (accord¬ ing to conjecture) stooped, for the pur- k 4 pose
pose of raising him; at that instant two assassins rushing from behind a clump of trees, where they had lain concealed, stabbed him in the side witli repeated blows, and left him weltering in his blood. . The wretch La Motte, as had been previously agreed upon, en seeing hini fall, hastened back to the palazzo with the tidings, wringing his hands in pre* tended sorrow, and in accents of seeming grief, related the pitiful tale to his lord, wlio immediately ordered his servants to hasten to the spot, accompanying them himself, in well-feigned despair at his brother's wretched fa^e. La Motte led the way; but when they arrh ed at the place of slaughter, the body was no where to be found, to the great astonish¬ ment
ment of all, and particularly to those Avhose guilty breasts felt a degree of fear mingled Avith their surprise. As they more closely examined the ground, a track of blood was seen, Avhich they trr ced to the rocks that OA'erhung the sea, Avhose auivcs dashed against the shores ofthe forest's edge. His cloak and hat Avere discovered near, and it Avas concluded by Augustino and his folloAA r - ers, that not being quite bereft of life, he had, in eudr-fwouring to. escape, or seek assistance, clambered up the precipice,. nnd owing to the darkness of the night, was precipitated into the devouring flood. A p'JpaMe pretext had been made for his dep- lure U> :hu denv sties, who en- terta ; ned not the ia st su'pic'on of this diaboUcal transaction. Augtistino l;ad K 5 already
already taken care no oiie should ever hear of his brother's maniage; and this horrid business being- concluded with •such ultimate success, he assumed tlie title of marquis, and took possession of his dear-bought honours, without dread or fear of discoA'ery. But he felt not happy ; his brother's blood laid heavy on his conscience, and smote him bitterly with pangs of horror. Fate, as if in some measure to avenge the deathof Fernando, took from him his wife, and by a severe iUness, made him long despair of his .son's existence. This nearly drove him to frenzy, for he dearly loved the in¬ fant Rosalva. At length it pleased ■ the omnipotent and merciful God to restore his health, and he Avas graciously pleased no longer to punish the child for the offences ofthe blood-stained parent; and this
this Heaven-favoured boy was spared, that he might Uve to thwart, by his no¬ bleness of mind, the wicked plans of his guilty father.
k6 CHAP-
CHAPTER XT.
The Libertine's Victim. We Avill iioav return to Rosalina, Avho had brought into the Avorld a sweet girl, a miniature resemblance of hersel f. Her father had forgiven her disobedience, and she each dav exr ected the return of her husband, Avhose feUcity she knew would be great in beholding his infant daughter. At length the ill-fated letter arrived, and by its baneful influence destroyed tlie fa¬ bric of bliss Avhich she had so long rear¬ ed in fancy. The
The Avretched De Valmont vras almost frantic. This fresh proof of perfidy, and from the man Avhom he thought his only friend, made him voav eternal enmity Avith the Avhole human race. In his first fit * of raving, he Avept and tore his liair, im¬ ploring Ileavoi to punidi the deceitful author of his calamity. I lie honour of his house was uoav stained for ever ; ibr by endeavouring to seek just ice, he Avould only expose the infamy of his cluld. When the first transports of his rage Avere sbomewhat subsided,' he reflected that the perfidious Fernando Avas uoav no more, and that repining might in¬ crease his sorrow, but could not cure. Thus Aveighing the matter, he felt re solved to summon all his fortitude, and bear his misfortune Uke a true philoso¬ pher. Tliis commendable resolution AA r as aided
aided by the consoling idea that his daughter's shame might *be kept from - the knowledge of the censorious Avorld, He now sought his heart-broken Rosa¬ Una, whom, by his; conciliating manners, and promises of continued affection he endeavoured to sooth and reconcile to her fate. This commiseration, and unlooked-for tenderness from her beloved parent, in some measure tranquilUzed her afflicted mind, and by endeavouring to subdue her Aveakness, caUed forth a dignified pride and energy of soul, Avhich, until then, she knew not Avas in her nature. All her past tenderness and love she had felt for the cruel deceiver she banished frorn her breast,and strove to bury the remem¬ brance of his memory beneath her wrongs, which she was determined to bear
bear Avith a degree of stoicism. AU her attention was now dedicated to her fa¬ ther and lovelv infant, to whom she had given her oavii appellation, and Avhose endearing smiles beguiled her cares. Tbus passed her time in divided duty for several montlis, till one fatal night, when they had retired to rest, and in the arms of refreshing sleep sought re¬ pose, De Valmont Avas aAvoke by a pier¬ cing shriek that issued from the cham¬ ber of his daughter. He started in great surprise, and opening the door, a cloud of smoke,Avhich till then had been confined, burst in upon him, and almost stifled hiin with its suffocating steams. " Oh, my child!" he exclaimed, as the deAOiir- ing flames burst through various parts of thedAvelUng, "my cluld! her iniant! oh Heaven,
Heaven, they will perish!" With dis¬ traction he rushed to her apartment, when, to his confusion, he found the door was fastened. This, added to the trepidation he felt, caused a delay of some time ere he could gain an entrance, when he found part of the flooring had already given war, and it was with great difficulty he coulu reach the bed, which, when he effected, he found, to his great grief and horror, that his daughter, in endeavouring to en-ape, had sunk into the room below, and perished amidst the dreadful conflagration; her infant still lay sleeping, unconscious of the destruction which surrounded it. Frantic with de¬ spair, he caught it to his hreast and in¬ stantly darting through the flames, wliich enveloped lum, gained the stair¬ case,
case, and bore the babe off unhurt, at the moment when the room gave Avay with a loud crash. Some of the inhabitants of the neigh¬ bouring viUage perceiving the fire, ran to his assistance, but too late to discover any signs of RosaUna, whose beloved remains Avere consumed in the ruins; but their exertions succeeded in prevent¬ ing the entire destruction of the cottage; and his own chamber, together witli some of his property, were saved by their endeavours; Avhile some were busied in coUecting what trifles Avere preserved, others Avere trying to compose the feel¬ ings of the unhappy sufferer, Avho was conducted for shelter to the hospitable roof of a neighbouring peasant. AVhile he was seated in a chair, en¬ folding in his embrace, and dropping a tear
tear upon the infant cheek of his grand¬ child, a woodcutter from the adjacent forest having heard of what had hap¬ pened, came into the house, and ad¬ dressing De Valmont, said, "Signor, your cottage has been fired by some deadly foe of yours." " Ah! how know you that ?" asked the other. " Pardon my curiosity," answered the woodcutter, " but is not your name De Valmont?" " It is," answered the Avretched man, astonished at the question, for in his re¬ tirement he had passed by another title. " Then I am right; and had I knoAvn it before, signor, I could have Avarned you of your approacliing calamity; for as I AA r as returning from my labour in the forest, I heard two men, of suspicious ap¬ pearance,
pearance, discoursing beneath a tree; I listened, for I thought they were after no good, as they appeared to conceal themselves from observation; I heard one of them say to the other, ' Neither De Valmont or a child of his must any longer exist, therefore I say again, that our surest method will be to fire the dwelling, and consume them altogether." " God!" said the wretched man, *' what have I done to merit such an enemy ?" " I know not that," said the woodcut¬ ter, " for I did not stay to hear more; and being assured they were assassins, I was fearful lest they might discover me, for if they had, no doubt but I should have dearly paid for my curiosity. This looming, hearing of your misfortune, it struck
struck me that you might be the person to whom they alluded." De Valmont, on hearing this account, was overwhelmed Avith astonishment. In vain he ^-ibked his mind in endea¬ vouring to guess who instigated the vtte incendiaries to tliis cruel act; but his suspicions were groundless, for he con¬ cluded some of his enemies in France had pursued him even into exile. After revolving in his mind, and forming seve¬ ral schemes for the defeat of their malice for the future, he adopted tliat which appeared the most feasible. This Avas, to go into a distant part ofthe countiy, and never to divulge his name to any human being Avhatever. By this means, he thought he might be able to shun the implacable resentment of his mortal eno niies.
vnies. He no sooner resolved on thii* but he put it in practice; and a box*. containing some cash, and the most va¬ luable part of his property, which Avas fortunately saved from the ruins of his cottage, furnished him witii the means. He hired a carriage, and after forcing a compensation upon his hospitable enter¬ tainer, he bade an eternal adieu to a place so fatal to his peace. After journeying several days, he passed near to Pyrano. The Valley of the Vintagers seemed calculated to afford a safe retreat, but to avoid the possibi¬ lity of eA r er being discovered, he journey¬ ed several leagues further to an inn, where, dismissing the carriage, told the driver he was unable to proceed farther by land, and should wait there for a ves¬ sel to take him to the place of his destina¬ tion.
tion. He then procured a person to take eare of his grandchild until his return, hired a mule, and proceeded to the Val¬ ley, where, finding a cottage, with a small garden, to be disposed of, he purchased them, and returned to the inn for his Ut¬ tle charge, for whom he procured a little viUage girl as a nurse ; and to baffle aU inquiries, he passed himself as a widower, who had recently buried his wife, under the assumed appeUation of Ferrand St*. Almo, and father to the infant. His days now passed on in peaceful •melancholy. The tuition of the little Rosalina, and the culture of his garden, afforded him sufficient employment, and beguiled many an hour. Thus year suc¬ ceeded year, and no enemy appeared to interrupt his tranquillity. In the mean time, RosaUna advanced in
in growth and beauty, The mystery of her birth Valmont had never unfolded to her, so that when he used to AA r eep for the loss of her mother, the innocent giri thought he lamented the death of a Avife f not a daughter. The unhappy exile hugged himself with fancied security, and the pleasing hope of sinking unmolested to the peace¬ ful grave. Alas! poor Avretch ! fate had reserved thee for a cruel death, for he feU, as related in the first chapter, beneath the dagger of Roldon the assassin. The marquis di Barozzi A\as in conti¬ nual dread Avhile he kneAV De Valmont, his daughter and child, still existed, (for fear is ever a constant attendant of the giulty); therefore, to insure his security, he formed the horrid idea of consuming them together in thek cottage. In
In Venice he was not long in finding ruffians easily bought by all-seducing gold, and wicked enough to execute his dreadful purpose, in whicli, though tiiey did not accomplish their full intent, they too far succeeded; and on tlieir return, the ears of the marquis were gratified m hearing they had all perished in the flames, as the wretches he employed ful¬ ly assured him. Barozzi was so well pleased at this in¬ teUigence, that he gave them an addi¬ tional reward; and shortly after, La Motte, that instrument of his guut, was found dead in his bed, to the great joy of his master, who had long regarded hiro with an eye of suspicion, knowing the poAver which he possessed over him. In¬ deed some of tiie domestics supposed tliat he did not cone fairly by his end, but
but were too AA : ise to express their thoughts on so dangerous a subject. The marquis now lived, as he thought* free from the danger of being betrayed, without feeling the leait remorse for the blood he had shed in obtaining his un- laAvful Avealth. Familiar with scenes of cruelty,his heart had become caUous, and deaf to every feeling of humanity; and the only circumstance whicli made any impression upon it, was the last letter from the wretched Marian, to whom Ave will iioav return. That poor deluded girl, not hearing from her base betrayer, as lie had promi¬ sed, languished, and pined away in secret sorroAV; and to increase her grie£ she found she was fast approaching tOAA'ards that period, when she should bring mto vol. l l the
the AvorkTa living Avitness of her shame, to partake of her misery. Maddened by the idea of this convic¬ tion, she cast herself prostrate at the feet of her mother. Her heart-broken parent strove to comfort her wretched child; but, alas! she needed most that consolation Avhich she offered, for melancholy so preyed upon her mind, that she sunk into the grave ere Marian* had AveU recovered from the danger and peril of childbirth. A beautiful boy, unhappy offspring of illicit loA r e! brought to its Avretched mo¬ ther, witli a large share of maternal affec¬ tion, a load of cares Iioav to find him food and the necessaries of life. The landlord, at the death of Marian's Avretched parent, had ordered her to quit the
the cottage. This harsh command she was forced to obey, as she was already in arrears for rent; and setting her little property, Avith her child in her arms, she sought refuge in a humble lodging at Paris. Her beauty attracted admirers even in her forlorn condition, but she was deaf to every stranger tongue, and rejected their solicitations with indigna¬ tion, for she stiU loved her dear betrayer in spite of his cruelty, therefore Avas re¬ solved never to deviate from that con¬ stancy to which she had sAA**orn. At a shop she procured work for her needle, at which she Avas a proficient, and ap¬ plied herself to it Avith indefatigable assi¬ duity; but attendance on her child, which occupied a large portion of time, prevented her from obtaining more than a scanty pittance, barely sufficient for l 2 subsistence.
subsistence. Thus she dragged on life in a Avay, though honest, yet miserable. Often Avere the eyes of poor Marian fiUed with tears, as she contemplated the fea¬ tures of her dariing child, avIio bore a striking resemblance to its remorseless father. She had frequently AATittcn to that cruel Avretch, imploring his assist¬ ance ; but the unfeeling marquis scarcely perused her letters, which he ne\ r er deigned to answer. To add to her calamitous situation^ the infant Avas seized Avith afeA r ei\ Avhose malignity AA^as soon seen in the large purple -spots which covered its innocent face. Its distracted mother had no mo¬ ney to procure advice; giving her last farthing to a Avomkn in the house where she lodged to look to her babe, she set forAvards into the street, for the purpose of
of begging. The shades of evening nearly obscured her face, when she met a good-looking female, whose charity she implored in most piteous accents of sup¬ plication. ' \ "Why do you not work?" sakl she, sharply. "Alas, madam! I cannot," replied the gentle girl, " for I have an infant perish¬ ing with a fever, and have no means to aUay its agonies." ** A fever!" said the unfeeling woman; ** perhaps contagious !" She hurried past her. *11 have nothing for you ;* apply to the hospital." Marian stood for a moment, then ex¬ claimed, " Oh, my child! my poor babe f dear cause of my miseries, and yet my heart's greatest joy! must you perish ? —Must I see vou die for want ?—Can *' a "* l 3 your
your Avretched mother find no friend to help her? Oh, holy Virgin ! send some benevolent, humane heart to assist, to succour tbe distressed, yet guUty Marian! Oh, Barozzi! surely did you know my wretchedness, you would surely stretch forth your hand to save me! Oh, where shall I go for relief 1— Oh, whither shall I fly?^ Her strength became exhaust¬ ed, and she Avas obliged to lean for sup¬ port against the portal of an elegant hotel. A man came forth, and seeing her stand, careless of his presence, roughly bade her begone, for she Avas in the way. Marian lifted up her eyes; the tears rushed down her pattid cheeks, and she Avas preparing to obey the harsh com¬ mand, which the man repeated in a still rougher tone, Avhen another, coming from
from the same door, asked A\diat Avas the matter? " Only some bad woman," said the first; " for she cannot be any good, or else she would not be loitering about people's doors at this time of night. Alv this city is fuU of them/* Marian ansAvered not, but sloAvly quitted his presence, unknoAving Avhi- ther to bend her steps, when the second man, struck Avith her forlorn appearance, foUoAved, and asked her if he could ren¬ der her any service ? The poor sufferer fixed her eyes meek¬ ly on his countenance; it beamed, she thought, with benevolence; and taking courage from his proffered assistance, she said, " Monsieur, I am in poverty; I have a child dying with sickness and fa¬ mine ; if you are a Christian, or a ehari- L 4 table
table man, bestoAv from your superfluity a smaU trifle to save my babe from pe> rishing!" The stranger looked on her, and put¬ ting his hand into his pocket, presented her A\ T ith a couple of livres. Marian Avas overpoAvered by his kind^ ness ; the tear of gratitude started to her eye; she Avould have thanked him, but found it impossible. Seizing his hand, she pressed it to her lips with enthusi¬ asm, then rusliing down a narroAV street, sought her lodging, buoyed witli the hope of being able to save her child; but, alas ! she was too late, for he, poor babe, Avas fast sinking to tlie grave; the cold damps of death stood upon its in¬ fant broAV; and while its unhappy mo* ther moistened its feverish Ups with cor¬ dial, (obtained by the means ofthe stran¬ ger's
ger's charitable donation), their livid hue too surely convinced he was breathing his last. In a state of distraction she snatched up a pen, and addressed the following words to the villain who had brought her to this deplorable situation:—
* £ Once more the heart-broken Marian writes to him who has been the cause of her shame, her infamy, and mi¬ sery. Barozzi, if you are not bereft of all feeling, peruse this attentively. I curse you not, though author of my calamity, for you are the father of that innocent being, whose departing soul will soon appear at Heaven's judgment-seat, and accuse its sire as his murderer! Oh, Augustino, he is your son—your desert¬ ed
ed son, a victim to famine and disease. Each groan that issues from its Ups is a dagger to his Avretched mother's heart,. wliich, lacerated by repeated wounds, Avill soon break, and give her peace, I forgive you, and sincerely hope Heaven will pardon you also. Ah, that groan ! 'tis more dreadful than the last! He is dead! Oh, unnatural father! your child is dead! My poor babe! Oh God, is it possible two parents can feel so different¬ ly ! I have become a beggar to procure him food, whUe his rich, unfeeling father left him to die the most horrid of deaths, lingering in the jaws of hunger and po¬ verty. My brain burns, and my beAvil¬ dered fancy renders me incapable of pro¬ ceeding—my heart throbs as if it would burst its confinement; yet no tears be- deAV my cheek; their source is exhaust¬ ed.
ed. But a little while, and I shaU return to my native dust. This is your work— this is your desolation. Beloved, yet cruel man, farewell! Oh, Augustino, the love I have felt for you wiU be ex¬ tinguished but with my life. Even now I would find excuses for you, were it pos¬ sible ; but my babe now Ues an awful witness against you, and speaks in lan- iruaffe more terrible than words. His father is his murderer! FareweU! oh, fareweU! My eyes begin to close ; the icy hand of death is upon me— I feel its agonizing pangs rush through my heart —it cracks, it breaks for you. Barozzi, oh, Barozzi!" With her last effort of remaining strength she folded the letter, and wrote the
228 barozzi: the superscription of this pathetic appeal to the inhuman marquis; she then put up a fervent prayer to Heaven to receive the fleeting soul of her innocent babe y then staggering towards the bed, she lay down by the side of her child's clay-cold corse, then imprinting a kiss upon its lifeless lips, and dropping a tear of an¬ guish on its paUid face, she yielded up her breath without sigh or groan. Surely her sufferings paid for her crimes ; they Avere atoned for by her re¬ pentance, and choirs of ministering an¬ gels sung a requiem for the rest of her departed soul as they wafted it to regions of eternal bUss. The sad remains of both herseff and child Avere deposited in one grave, by the benevolence of that humane and charitable stranger avIio had so generous¬ ly
ly administered to her distress; for his philanthropic heart AA-as melted by her misfortunes, and he traced her to her lodgings, Avith the noble intention of lending her further aid, and, by unre¬ mitted inquiries, gained a knowledge of her hapless story. Poor Marian ! Peace be to thy re¬ mains ! and may all those Avho pass the green sod which shields thee from re¬ proach, drop a tear to the memory of the iiberthie's victim !
END OF vol. i.
1 ........ *SS=SSSS£S£*——-*'**~SSZ2S^^ Printed by J. Darling:, LeadenliaU-Street, London.
