Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The nun of Santa Maria di Tindaro: a tale
TUR NUN OF SANTA MARIA DI TINDARO.
CHAPTER I. " Observation," said De Beaib fort, " must long since have betrayed to you, Helena, that from the earliest dawn of my existence, 1 have been the slave of my own passions, the victim of bl?nd indulgence, and a mistaken education* Misled by the prejudices of tlîe worid, chasing imagined felicity, absorbed in dangerous pleasures and frivolous pur¬ suits, for whole years did I eagerly hunt after calamity, and pant for those joys forbidden to the voluptuary and tlie dis- voL. il в solute.
solute. The idol of a fond mother's hopes, opposition was known to me but by name; her heart;was formed for love, and caprice and the allurements of the world having estranged the husband of lier jehoicç, #11 tJiat hoard of loye cejitred in her son. In the retirement to wdiich blasted hope and outraged pride had ba¬ nished her, vve were her only consola¬ tion: our sports extorted a smile; our caresses beguiled the weight of sorrow ; our------" *«■ Wc—our," interrupting him, and fixing on bini an eye which would fain have dived into his inmost soul. His eyes bent beneath mine, and his cheek glowed a deeper tint, as he re¬ sumed-—" Be patient, my Helena; re¬ member, I haye promised to lay bare my heart—and my heart, Heaven knows, is full of frailty : you shall hear all its se¬ crets, from the earliest dawn of memory, until it ceased to know another hope than you. Yes, our, for, alas ! though early
early entrusted with thereins of my own guidance, nay fate was decreed ere yet the age of prepossession had arrived : the heart's blessed privilege of choiee was de¬ nied me, and, affianced almost in my cradle, I was taught ever to consider my orphan cousin, Hyacinthe de Beaufort, as my future wife. How dreadful, how oppressive is that tyranny, which seeks to overthrow the prerogative of man, which forges the vile chains of policy, and subverts the genial rights of nature! Oh, Helena ! upon this subject I could indeed speak volumes, for am not I the slave of such a compact ?*~w r as not I dragged to fulfil a bond in which my Iieart owned no interest?—am not I at this very moment, stung, bleeding with remorse, when I gaze on you—when I behold our child? Hateful, accursed stretch of power ! never, never can I re¬ call the past, without being wounded, harrowed, almost to madness." " Spare your feelings, Eugenius," I в 2 implored.
implored. " Give me your history with¬ out comment, and without digression," " Bear with me, my love," he rejoined; " have I not already told you, there is much, very much to pardon ?" I forced a smile.—" Your cousin, Hya¬ cinthe de Beaufort—Proceed, my Eu¬ genius —alike the charge of your forsa¬ ken mother, from infancy you knew no separate home." " Yes, from infancy vve were affianced. and our days of childhood could boast of little variation," continued De Beaufort. " Hyacinthe vvas the orphan heiress of my father's brother, and Hyacinthe, gen¬ tle and complying by luiture, dreamt not of the possibility of opposition : she considered me as the destined partner of her life, and never, even in thought, did her ideas wander." " Poor Hyacinthe!" I murmured, and my eyes filled vvith tears. De Beaufort was alarmed; he well knew tlie enthusiasm of my feelings ; he dreaded
dreaded lest compassion, and a principle of new awakened duty, shouki enjoin the fiat of separación. —** Spare your pity —spare your tears, my Helena," he eagerly resumed—** Hyacinthe, unlike yourself, possesses not that ethereal, that soul-transporting sensibility, \v hich glow¬ ing in your every feature, rivets the chain your beauty forges. Hyacinthe, the passive conformist to her duty, knows not the extremes of joy and sorrow." Oh, vvhat a reproach did those words convey ! My heart felt it, but I could not speak". Sensibility ! was it sensibi¬ lity, which in me fmd outraged every law, and severed every tie? Sensibi¬ lity! no, no, it was passion; blind, re¬ sistless, inordinate passion; it was that poison, which contaminates the sources of happiness, engendering nought but remorse and woe. Had I erred from sensibility, the hour of discovery had been the hour of enlargement—I should have renounced the bondage, even i* $ though
though I had died in the eflbrt—Heaven forgive me! it was not sensibility; for in all the struggles my mind sustained, ever did some palliative steal in to blunt the rising feelings of reproach towards my seducer. The injustice of a compulsatory mar¬ riage authorized the hearťs right of elec¬ tion, and when the matchless attractions, vvhen the tender fervour of Eugenius glowed upon memory, I judged not my¬ self the victim—I pitied the chains ne¬ cessity had compelled him to forge—I acquitted him for all the deceptions pas¬ sion had successfully practised; such, alas ! was the dangerous sway of sophis¬ try, the dictates of reason were hushed, judgment and principle subverted. What were the opinions of the world to a heart so infatuated—vvhat all its forms, all its ceremonies ? De Beaufort was my world : hope, and peace, and bliss, centred in his love. The husband of my inmost soul, the friend, the chosen partner of my
my bosom, De Beaufort lived in every feeling ; and such was my devotion, such the frantic zeal of my attachment, that on mv knees, prostrate in the sight of Heaven, I repeated the vows I had breathed with him at the altar; swear¬ ing to cling to him through life, to lighten all his cares, to soften every trial vvith vvhich fat-o and circumstances might assail him ; and though misery and death liad been the thieatened penalties, my courage and my faith had been undaunt- ed. Ah! how gladly would I throw a veil over that era of m v bein ¿í ! but I «t ïj have vowed to rive my inmost heart, to tear open every wound of memory, to warn the unthinking and the guileless, against those fatal storms of passion, vvhich assail the reason, and lay waste all the virtues of the mind« In the hour of self-communion, in the midnight so¬ litude of the chapel, humbled even to the dust, stretched upon the cold still n 4 vault
vault which enshrines all that is mortal of the sisters of Santa Maria di Tindaro —there have I vowed to make this light atonement, to impress on a corrupt world, the despair, the remorse, the cor¬ roding anguish ofa reproving conscience. Let Vice assume vvhat garb she may, whetlier she triumphs through the senses, or whether in the golden lure of riches she tempts a dereliction from justice; however the judgments of men be blind¬ ed—however the perpetrator escape the sting of mortal shame—however he veil bis iniquities beneath the mask of sancti¬ fication —the avenging thorn lies buried in his heart: there it goads; there it rankles; for the hourof awakened thought tausi coroe —the shades of death must encompass. Life, spun to its furthest limitation, is but a dream—a passing shadow vamshmg into air—a mere breath, a roere bubble, the sport alike of casualty : a few flitting years, and all the struggles of our passions, all the pange
pangs of grief and pain, close in the grave; a few flitting years, and this earth, the theatre alike of joy and sor¬ row, knows us no more. But I digress —I wander in the labyrinth of my own reflections, and forget that tlie littie sto¬ ry of De Beaufort remains untolfck " From the age of fourteen," pursued Eugenius, " I saw little of my father: the last slender link in the chain of in¬ terest was severed; he ceased to visit Montmelian, and my mother» seldom quitted her residence. Y^ears passed away in dullîuniformity,foü between my college and my maternal home, røy Hfe could boast of no variation. Sometimes my heart would glow with resentment and indignation towards my estranged parent, but ever would the tears of · шу gentle mother quell the ebullition,« im¬ pressing upon my mind the duty of sub¬ mission and obedience-: sometimes slie would implore roe to bury her wrongs in my own heart nor even in thought« в 5 to
to breathe reproach or invective: but my nature was ever prone to opposition ; the straight path of conformity by me was despised ; and though I wouid listen to the arguments of my mother, more than ever was I resolved to appeal to the heart of my father. " Scarcely were the trammels of in¬ struction passed, scarcely had I assumed the reins of my own actions, when I re¬ solved to seek the retreat in which my father buried himself and his pleasures. I bid adieu to my mother and Hyacinthe, and without hinting my mtention, jour¬ neyed to Paris, repaired instantly to the agent who .transacted my father's tem¬ poral concerns, and through him learnt, that near the little town of Pezenas, in Languedoc, the count de Beaufort re· sided. " Tortured by conflicting passions, without pausing to analyze the aim or the nature of my appeal, I pursued my Quixotic enterprise, resolving to work upon
upon* his feelings and if possible bring him a suppliants to my motheťs feet. How wild, how shapeless Wuë the dream ! I knew not that the heart owns no law— that spuming at restraint, it clings to its own choice, in spite of a thousand bar¬ riers ; I knew not that man* bowing to the delightful tyranny of love, dares trample on the restrictions which custom so despotically imposes*—no, I knew not the nature, the transport of the passion, till you,« my Helena, stamped it eter¬ nally in my bosom. " Tedious and uninteresting was my journey into Languedoc: my mind was too absorbed by its own speculations, to dwell for a moment on the diversified beauties of nature and cultivation whieh dappled each feature of the landscape. Led by the enthusiasm of my feelings» I pictured nought save my mother resto¬ red to happiness—I dreamt of nought save the thrilling accents of her gratitude, and the fervent pressure ©f her fond em* в б brace.
brace· * Yes, my mother,' I would ex* claim, * my lather, converted by Ae just¬ ness of my reasoning, will· retura to ho¬ nour and to you : love wffl spring from its own asiles ; virtue will kindle the fin¬ gering flame of hope and bliss.' *ƒ Such was the nuabow. dream of my reveries—such the buoyant anticipations which impelled roe ; nor, tUL I reached tbe neighbourhood of Pezepas* did I onee pause ţo regulate my plan of ap* peal; then, for the first Öme, røy heart misgave me, and then gloomy» subduing fo-rebodenc« quelled the ardour of my spirit, ? I continued in the town buta suffi¬ cient time to gain the necessary instruc¬ tions, and at the briUiant obse of an au¬ tumnal day, set out on foot to seek the habitation of my father. The distance of half а -league seemed protracted to the length,of ten, and yet when, led by the mazy windings ofthe pellucid Feyrn, I lud nearly reached the wood жЬдеЬда* bosorjied
bosomed the picturesque villa, I paused υροη its banks. I turned to face the breeze,, as though its balmy wing came freighted with healing and comfort. Alas ! 1 cannot describe to you the war within my brain^ nor the perturbatio» with which I pushed through the shrub¬ bery, and sought the front entrance. Si¬ lence and sadness hmig around : the win¬ dows were all darkened, and the doors closed, as if the chateau was deserted. A universal trembling seized me; my heart felt chilled to ice : had my father quitted his abode, and was my journey vain and inefficient ? * Saints of mercy!' I exclaimed, as roy hand grasped the bell, and when» its shrill sound reverbe¬ rated on my ear, I started as though un¬ conscious of my own effort. The ap¬ pearance ofa servant called for exertion; but when in breathless accents I asked for the count de Beaufort, the reply stretched me pale and lifeless at his. feet The eount de Beaufort had expired three hours
1юиг& before, and my unfortunate mother was widowed in distance and neglect" Eugenius paused for a moment—my tears mingled with his—it recalled the sudden seiaure of my own deserted fa¬ ther, and remorse, regret, and anguish, mingled in my feelings. ** When I revived," pursued Eugenius, " I fonna myself stretched upon a couch, and the being who was administering to ray recovery weeping over me. Her sobs and tears awakened recollection—I looked up^—I feebly pressed her hand in token of m v ^atitude; hut vvhen I again pronouncetl the name of De Beaufort, her sobs and tears redoubled. Alas, Helena ! it was the usurper of my mother's rights —the friend, the mistress of my depart¬ ed father." " The friend —the mistress of your father, ofthe count de Beaufort!" I fear¬ fully articulated. '* Avenging Powers ! conviction flashes on my brain—it was —it must have been my mother. Recall that
that moment, Eugenius; recall her voice, her form, her features—look in my face, and tell me, bear I a resemblance to the mistress of your father ?" " I saw her but in the hours of grief," he rejoined. " Torture not your feel¬ ings, my Helena ; though young and lovelv, she bore no comparison to you." " Did you make no inquiry ?" I again importuned ; " did you not even hear her name ?" " She was known by the name of her protector," he replied ; " and without an aim, vvhy should my curiosity have been awakened ? I followed my fatber to the grave, and in quitting Pezenas, I lost sight for ever of the unfortunate woman, who seemed to mourn him with heart¬ felt affliction. I returned to Montme¬ lian, and in one little year was called upon to perfect the hateful compact po¬ licy had forged. Ah ! forgive me, my heart's friend, rf I hurry over that fatal period of my life. Dull, cold, and joy¬ less.
less, was my ill-starred marriage; no- glow of rapture, no dream of bliss anti¬ cipated the awful ceremony; bare ac¬ quiescence led me to the altar; for though I had never beheld you, my Helena, tliough Hyacinthe was youngs amiable,. and gentle,, my heart w r as deaf to the thrill of passion. Had the hour which. made her my owrn severed the thread of life, her fate had been mourned, but not her loss—Oh no ! for 'twas in mere con¬ formity to the decree of others that I pronounced the vow." Alas! the vow kad been pronounced ! what then was the vow Eugenius had pronounced with me? a profanation of all that was holy—a mockery in the sight of Heaven. Blessed saints ! how wild, how harrowing were the reflections of that moment ! despair, love, hatred, al¬ ternately swayed my feelings^ my hand, cold and powerless, dropped from his, . and hanging my head, 1 tried to hide my pale face in my bosom. " Turn
" Turn not away in anger," he im¬ plored ; " shrink not from my love. Co¬ vered with guilt and shame,. I throw myself upon your affection—I appeal to your heart—ah! tear it not from me, for the hour wliich disunites us will be the last hour of my existence. Born but to adore you, living but in your smile, it was you who tempted the violation of every sacred tie—Helena, my own wor¬ shipped Helena, spurn me not, became you were matchless, and my heart vul- neiable. I saw you, and fate made me your own—I spoke to you, and for your love I would have exchanged the joys of heaven." Ah ! how could I reject the tears and prayers of De Beaufort ! I spoke not, but he read in my eyes nought but ten¬ derness and pardon. " For three months," he resu med, press¬ ing my hand to his lips, " I continued at Montmelian ; my destiny seemed ac¬ complished, and I was calm and submis« sive.
sive, My mother had recovered her se¬ renity; the transgressions of my father were forgiven, all past injuries buried in hils grave; her spirits regained their na¬ tive tonfe, and she appeared to look to the future With new-awakened hope. " It was at this period rebellion first reared her blood ν crest, and the long-hid- den sparks of disaffection burst into a raging flame. The tale journeyed fest, but the terror was transient, for relying on the proverbial loyalty of Frenchmen, we thought the storm would soon sub¬ side, and allegiance and fealty re-dawn ; nay, so little did I foresee the fearful throes which have engulphed us all, that at the instigation of two of my college associates, Angerville, and the nephew of the possessor of the fortress di Brolo, I consented to quit Montmelian, and join them ih an excursion to Sicily. Hya¬ cinthe was too gentle to oppose my wish, and so slight were the attractions she ever boasted over my heart, that I left her
SANTA MARIA Dl TINDARO. her under the charge of my mother with¬ out one sensation of regret. "Ah! Helena, the crisis of my fate approaches. I quitted Montmelian with a mind at ease, with spirits light, un¬ broken, joining in the laugh of hilari ty, and free from care and thought. The tie of marriage is a slender barrier to feelings uninfluenced ; ere yet 1 bid adieu to Savoy, Hyacinthe was remembered but as a cousin. Banish that frown, my sweet reprover; you, and you alone, could fix the rover ; for sueh is the pernicious privilege of custom, such the frailty of human nature, that man spurns all chains but those which love hath forged. * " Proceeding by easy stages into Pro- v enee, vve yielded the reins of time to inclination, and either sojourned or de¬ viated from the regular route as pleasure or curiosity prompted. At Grenoble, we visited the monastery of the Grand Char¬ treuse ; at Valence, in the cloister of the Cordeliers, the skeleton of the giant Bu- arclus ;
ardus ; at Orange, the colossian ruins of Romish splendour ; and at Avignon, the tomb of Laura. Unmindful of the ridi¬ cule of my companions, I lingered on the spot dedicated to love, and vvith an en¬ thusiasm almost prophetic, tarried whole hours in the valley of Yaucluse; now- pausing on the borders of the Sorgue, now almost hallowing the sacred Par¬ nassus of the unfortunate Petrarch. " We sailed from Marseilles, and waft¬ ed by the softest gales, borne on the pel¬ lucid bosom of the Mediterranean, we soon lost sight of the shores of our na¬ tive land. Not once did my thoughts wander back to Montmelian; no spell¬ binding charm lurked in the smile of tlie absent Hyacinthe ; and my mother, con¬ tent in her society, presented no cause tó cheek the exuberance of my spirits. 4 * Was it love, my Helena, which filled my breast with transport, when I first hailed the emerald garb of your native Sicily, when rising, as it were, from the deep,.
deep, she burst upon my ravished gaze, her hills, her forests, tipped with the rich burnish of departing glory ? The golden. beams of the sun were fast sinking, and the flaky radiance of the heavens fading into grey. My eyes measured the calm, the beauteous panorama, and my ears eagerly caught the low sounds vvhich came wafted from the shore. Full of gay anticipation, I hailed the distant city, little thinking that in six short days the boast of freedom WOuld no more be mine; that, snared in the fatal gyves of love, the past vvould be remembered but with horror, the future steeped in dread. " We sojourned a few days at Messina, and from thence proceeded to the for¬ tress dì 'Brolo, for though its possessor, the marchese Lungarini, was absent, Angerville and his friend wished me to visit what they called the Eden of Sicily. With a light and fearless heart, smiling at their panegyric, I sought that Eden, and
and in it beheld the Eve destined to sway every hope of my future life. * f Entranced with the rich and beau¬ teous scenery which had everywhere met my eyes, in the evening I left my .friends at the castle, and descended alone into the valley. It was then, Helena, in that never-to-be-forgotten walk» that you burst upon my view, enriched vvith more charms than the poeťs lightest dream could picture ! I saw you at the door of father Christian's hermitage: your eyes were raised to the brilliant firmament; your bonnet bad fallen at your feet, and your ebon locks, half-sha¬ dowing your ivory bosom, flowed upon your shoulders. Gracious Heaven í in one short moment what a revolution in niy ideas—vvhat an age v, :is I gone in luve ! You opened the door, and I lost you—I tarried for a whole hour, but 1 beheld you no more. tfc Disappointed, thoughtful, I returned to
to mv friends, but I buried the adven- ture in mv own hreat-t—I feared to name the angelic vision which had crossed my path, lest exciting curiosity, they too shouid seek her out, and gaze on charms I had seen but to worship. Alas, Hele¬ na! even at that early period, a thousand wild visions sprung in my bosom—a thousand shapeless hopes waylaid my heart, spite ofthe bai rier w hich inter¬ posed between us, I dared to love you ; and when 1 dared to love you, I dared the hope of making you my own. For¬ giv e me, my angel friend, in confessing, that schooled in the usages of the vvorld, I shrunk not from the crime of seduc¬ tion: your person had enslaved my senses; and your person, 1 had vet to iearn, was but tlu beauteous casket of a mind as rare. In the darkness of night, restless, perturbed, vague and shapeless schemes banished sleep; visions of sweetest im¬ port fanned imagination ; and the dear¬ est
est w/ish of my heart was to secure the prize of yours. " In the morning, under the plea of indisposition, I remained at the fortress, and my friends departed on an intended excursion through the island, I pro¬ mised to join them at the little town of San Stefano, and from Palermo to cross with them to Naples : but though my lips pronounced this promise, my feelings forbade its fulfilment; and after I had lost sight of them, whole hours did I pass in planning devices how best to elude the heavy tax of their society. The plea of unexpected intelligence from Savoy ap¬ peared the best expedient; and more fully to ensure my plan, I wTote to An¬ gerville, announcing the arrival ofa mes¬ senger, bearing information ofthe alarm¬ ing indisposition of madame de Beau¬ fort, and my determination of immedi¬ ately returning to Montmelian. This letter I despatched to San Stefano, with strict
Strict orders for the messenger to pursue the party to Termini, or even to Paler¬ mo, rather than omit its safe delivery. Success crowned my wishes : my mes¬ senger returned : Angerville had got my letter, and unsuspected, unmolested, I sojourned at Di Brolo. " Full well, my Helena, do you know the rest: tlie misanthropy of your fa¬ ther forwarded my purpose, for, alas ! I dared not openly profess my claim. I dived not into his sorrows—I knew not the mournful storv of his wron£4— í * о judged him, from all I could glean, a cold splenetic moralizcr, and to snatch you from a home so cheerless excited nothing like regret I wooed you then in secret, and you smiled upon my pas¬ sion. I found you a thousand times more lovely than you had appeared even in the first hour of enthralment, and if for an instant honour pictured Hya¬ cinthe, love drove the appellant from the field. Nurtured in the cradle of mvs- vot . il с tery
tery and romance, warm* tender, unsus¬ picious, enthusiastic, our first meeting in the chapel of father Christian's her¬ mitage was conclusive. I had seen tlie world—I had mingled in its busy throng —I had read the hearts of men ; how then could your innocent heart bc hid from my discernment ? Helena, I saw myself the possessor of that dear heart, and I gloried in the conviction: the blush, the sigh, all fanned my hopes, and your timid fear of your father, your ea¬ ger anxiety to hide from him all know- ledgè'of our chanee-mecting, armed me with new powers against you. Without danger I could speak of intruding iuto the presence of Montcalm, of suing you at his hands, of softening him by my tears and entreaties, because I well knew your terror would bar my passage. " In talking thus, I removed every suspicion from your mind, and gradually instilled doubts of your father. 'Tis true, when I overtook you in the path leading
leading to your dwelling, his anger and liis agony mocked my penetration ; but still 1 savv nothing to deter : more than ever I pressed for the privilege of expla¬ nation, and more than ever you warned nie to avoid it. " Oh what a system of deceit did I practise ! how was justice, how was hu¬ manity blinded by this propelling pas¬ sion ! self governed every action, swayed every thought Y r es, Helena, but for the vestal purity of your own mind, Heaven had not been profaned by a second cere¬ mony. I would have whispered my daring hopes, but I feared to lose my hold upon your aflection; I feared to ileride the sacred authorities of custom, lest, temfied and dismayed, affrighted virtue shouki escape the snare long laid for her undoing. " Yet think not, my gentle, my an¬ gehe friend, that had cncumstances been propitious, I would even in thought have sullied the purity I worshipped ; no, no, с 2 Helena*
Helena, Heaven can bear me witness, had I beheld you before my fatal union with Hyacinthe, no power, no persua¬ sion on this earth, should have lured me from you : the tie of engagement would have been as nought ; the restraints of parental authority vain and puerile ; a love such as mine would have subdued a thousand obstacles, would have scoffed at difficulties wdiich others might appal. Blessed Mary! the pride, the glory of my life, would have been to have pro¬ claimed my choice; to have led you from your solitude ; to have presented you to my mother, to the world; to have clung to you for peace and bliss; to have known no hope, no joy, but in your affection." " Alas !" I articulated, casting on him a look of mingled reproof and sorrow, " is my affection less valued ?—am I less beloved? Bear in mind, Eugenius, I was a stranger to the claim of Hyacinthe. Oh ! had I known it^-----" ** What then ?" interrupting me with a start
a start of terror—" teli me, Helena, what then?" " I had never quitted Sicily," I mourn¬ fully replied—" 1 had never blushed in the name of mother—I— ice had escaped this fatal labyrinth of guilt and misery, into which a headlong passion hurls us. Oh, my God! oh, my father!" and a flood of bitterness streamed down my cheeks, " better to have been a nun— better to have steeped my couch in tears —better to have wasted my youth in watching» than, to have lived a curse, a burden, tø the roan I love i" , s " You—you a curse, a burden ! oh, say not so, Helena! say not so," and sinking,, almost convulsed, at my feet, he hid his face on my knee : " a curse— a burden! if you wish not to destroy me, repeat no more that cruel sentence. Oh ! if you could tear open my heart— if you could see the bleeding wounds of memory, you would not rend it with a pang so bitter. Helena, 'tis I who с 3 have
have been your curse. Forgive me— drive not the penitent from your bosom.** " Never, never!" 1 sobbed, clasping him in my arms, and mingling my tears with his ; ** live for me—love me, Euge¬ nius, and forget the reproach my lip«? have clared to utter." ** Yes, dearest Helena Γ exclaimed the energetic De Beaufort, " solace of my cares, hope of my existence, we will live' for each other ; vve will know no sepa¬ rate interest, no separate fate. Bound in the soft firm fetters of immortal pas¬ sion, vve vvill forget every other claimant, and glory in the blissful tie by vvhich wc are indissolubly united." Alas ! how bitter is the tax of memo¬ ry í —how weak the human heart !—how true, how f fresh, the record of past crimes and past sorrows ! Even in this cell, in this exterminating grave of love and hope, remembrance paints the cold wan cheek of penance with the flitting rose of enthusiasm. Let me draw a veil theii over
éter the precious moment of reconcilia¬ tion, and hasten to conclude the expla¬ nation which threw a light upon every former mystery. " During my residence at the fortress di Brolo," resumed Eugenius, " the flam¬ ing brand of anarchy was raging in the heart of France; meetings of the most alarming nature were convened through¬ out the kingdom, and the decisive and venturous strokes of desperate men were plotting; the provinces were revolting from their allegiance, and all was ripen¬ ing to the total overthrow of social order. The letters of* my mother and Hyacinthe teemed with alarm and danger: filled with the sad catalogues of ruin and enor¬ mity, yet faintly expresssive of the wretchedness which prevailed, the}' be¬ sought me to return to «Montmelian, and wondered at the spell vvhich withheld me, Ah! little did they dream that that spell was firm as adamant—that not to have snatched them and all my world- c 4 ly
ly effects from destruction, would I have fled from Sicily. The hope of making you my own filled every wish of my heart, and but for the receipt of those intrusive letters, I had almost forgotten such a place as Montmelian, or such a being as Hyacinthe. " Yes, Helena, if for a moment duty prevailed—if in absence I thought of re¬ visiting Savoy, your look, your voice, your tear of sensibility, your smile of in¬ nocence, defying me to exist in distance, recalled røe to my allegiance : besides, I had heard the fanatic designs of Mont¬ calm, and I knew not vvhat dangers might assail my treasure, for the bare thought of the monastery of Santa Maria di Tindaro was worse than the annihi¬ lating thunder of Heaven. " Through Claudine I learnt all that was passing within your dwelling—Mont¬ calm's intended departure from Sicily, and his determination of first depositing you in the cloister. Every feeling of my
my nature warred against the threatened sacrifice, and though so fatally bound and fettered, spurred on by desperation, I dared propose the mockery of marriage. Full well I knew it was but mockery, for the image of the absent Hyacinthe rose in judgment against me. Your total ignorance of the world, your confidence in my honour, your guileless innocence, too, Helena, combating resolution, al¬ most at times compelled me not to act tlie villain: but your attractions, your celestial beauty, your tenderness, your endearments—oh say, was it man to forego such temptation, to renounce such a treasure? I was but шап, and passion was too strong for heroism : every look, every word, told me your heart was all my own ; how then could I doom that heart to misery—how could I win it but to bid it break ? If I banished myself from you, if I quitted Sicily, would not sorrow and despair become your portion? —whereas, if I hid you in my ow r n bo- с 5 som,
som, my affection would constitute yomŕ felicity, and my guilty secret be easily withheld: besides, the immolation of youth and beauty seemed to me a bar¬ barous stretch of power; and there too inclination claimed a strong auxiliary: in feet, honour's stand was feeble, for passion conquered every just appeal. Once removed from Sicily, happiness and security would be alike my own; for however interest might occasionally lead me to Montmelian, love vvould con¬ stitute my paradise, and leave me nought to sigh for. " Such, my Helena, was the policy which led you blushing to the altar— which wooed your virgin faith, and bound you in unholy bonds ; for my heart misgave me when I pledged the vow, and courage for a moment faltered. " Fresh news of direful import arri¬ ving from France, required immediate exertion ; longer to tarry in inaction was impossible: Montcalm too resolved to join
join the royal cause ; and with me na¬ ture added a second stimulus, the anx¬ ious appeal of my mother. I will not speak of the letters of Hyacinthe : they too were urgent, but they vvere ever perused vvith an eye of indifference, and burnt without one feeling of regret ; for she possessed no influence over my ac¬ tions, no power to win me for a moment to her; aversion had succeeded indiffe¬ rence ; for, had not the fatal tie whick bound us tempted my dereliction from probity and honour? " Such, too frequently, are the guilty reasonings of the heart ; beguiled by self- love, we palliate onr own enormities, and seek extenuations, even at the ex- pence of the injured. In the retirement of my years of boyhood," pursued De Beaufort, " the patriotic glow of loyalty had been engendered : ever with pride and exultation had I perused the memo¬ rials of Henry's valour, hud I lingered with delight o'er his actions, and dived, c G through
through the medium of his minister Sully, into the secrets of his closet: great ahke as a hero and a monarch, I had traced him through all the vicissi¬ tudes of his venturous fortune; from the cradle to the camp—from the camp to the throne ; wading with him through seas of blood, I had ever hailed the glo¬ ry of France in this the brightest star which graced the records of her ancient dynasty. The splendid victories of Louis the Fourteenth too, had in their turn often tinged my cheek with the rich glow of exultation; nay, every laurel which decked the annals of my eountry had by me been culled with enthusiasm and cherished with transport : how then could I know danger threatening the le- gitirøate descendant of a long race of kings, without pining to aid with my feeble arm the outraged laws of nations ? how could I know the subtilty of des¬ perate men, aiming the annihilation of all İ held sacred, and not rush to join the
thè band of the expatriated nobles? Saints and martyrs ! how did every feel¬ ing of my nature war against the ехе* crable regicides ! When I read ofthe at¬ tempted escape of the injured Louis and his helpless family—their arrival at St. Menehould—the loyalty^ ofthe postillion —the treachery of the infamous Drouet —their seizure on the bridge of Vareri.- nes—their return to Paris—their close imprisonment in the Temple—their wrongs—their indignities—all, all did I weep with tears of blood. " Each clay filled the black record of crime; each day noted the massacre of innocence, and the discomfiture and fall of rebellion's self-created demigods : for such ever is the suspicious tyranny of traitors, such their tenacity of autho¬ rity, that those who are not their tools or their accomplices, exciting jealousy and fear, successively become denounced, and bleed upon the scaffolds of their own erection! Yes, such is the awful, the retributive
Éetribütive justice of Heaven, that vice becoming entangled in its own snares,, the emissaries of cruelty and aggression ever fall through the politie wiles by Which they themselves impiously sapped the monarchy and government of their» eountry^ ** With feelings of indignation and in¬ describable dismay* I read the decisions ©f thé National Conventions the total abolition cf royalty in France, and the inveterate malice wdiich pursued tlie per¬ secuted emigrants: many of my own-; frieride had been arraigned before ihe mock tribunals of pretended justice—* many had bled, because they had dared oppose rebellion—many, with properties sequestered and lives denounced, were wanderers in foreign lands, east upon the benevolence of strangers, with every just feeling of pride and honour outraged. ** Oh, Helena ! all· this, and more tlmn this, I read in Sicily ; and still I inglo*. riously tarried ! Yes, love chained røe against
against duty, against humanity*-love ty¬ rannized over every principle of reason ; for to leave you exposed to the bigotted fanaticism of Montcalm, was worse than every ill which adverse fortune could in¬ flict. I could not take you to my fa¬ mily ; I had no home, no resting-place to offer : in removing you to France, I was exposing you to a thousand dangers;» but in leaving you in Sicily, one danger surmounted every other : I pictured the fulfilment of Montcalm's unnatural threats your tears, your unavailing struggles- doomed to a living tomb, fancy filled thé shriek of your despair, fancy faded the lustre ofyour eyes, withered the bloom of your cheeks, and clad you in all the dull cold livery of irremediable woe. " Oh ! judge then by these wild reve¬ ries, the dreadful, the torturing fever in my mind—the anguished, the almost deadly struggle, between fear and affec¬ tion ! Sometimes—journeying with me, the comfort and joy of -my existence, buoyed
buoyed up with youthful hope, I felt presumptuously secure in my own strength ; I thought I could sereen you from every ill, defend you, guard you, hide you in my bosom, and uphold you, spite of tlie storms which rocked the world. " The recovered health of Montcalm* and his firm determination of removing you to Santa Maria di Tindaro, com¬ pelled me no longer to act the visionary : roused to exertion,- a new system of ar¬ tifice remained to be practised: by the sacred ties of tbe church, you believed y otmelf united to me ; I knew the fatal subterfuge I had practised, and all my dependence rested on your total igno¬ rance of the world, and implicit confi¬ dence in me. " Aided by my active emissary, Clau¬ dine, in the dead of night you met me in the arbour; there I worked upon your warm and innocent heart : I taught you to believe that my safety required dis¬ guise ;
guise; Isilenced the blushing scruples of delicacy, and under the pretence of friends awaiting us at Messina, in boy's attire, veiling you from the possibility of suspicion, I removed you from tbe protection of your father. " Sweet novice î tender, beloved friend of my bosom ! think you, could I have proclaimed my marriage to the world, I would thus have purloined my bride, and stolen like a thief from Sicily ? No, no, Helena ! dear, treasured idol of my souľs hopes I had Hyacinthe been Дп heaven, had no prior claim existed, fear¬ lessly would I have braved your father's power, and maintained my right, in de¬ fiance of every law. " I need not retrace the track we have already journeyed, nor paint feelings amounting to remorse, wdiich the more intimate knowledge of your perfections excited ; often did I tremble as a culprit, when I folded you to r my bosom ; and when I listened tq the heroic sentiments
of triîth and virtue which flowed front your lips, ever did I execrate the arti¬ fice which had beguiled yon. The first, thè fondest wish of my heart was grati¬ fied—I possessed you, Helena, but I was not happy : nay, droop not, my gentle love—chase away those tears of sadness : I was not happy, because there was á concealment, a secret wliich I dared not disclose; I Worshipped the purity of your mind, the enthusiasm of your cha¬ iacter; I dreaded lest by some cruel chance, truth should be revealed, .and I become hunlbled in your eyes : I dread¬ ed thé awful dignity of outraged virtue, I felt that thé flat of death would be preferable to separation. Mine w r as not a mere dream of passion—I loved you, not as men too often love, to possess, then break the heart whicli trusted ! No, I loved »you with the purest, firmest principles of honour, with a faith not to be shaken, with an affection which would haVe selected you frani the whole world, aud
and centered every pride and every hope in your keeping. " Full vvell you know the almost an¬ nihilating blow vvhich assailed my senses in the sacking and fall of Montmelian ; it marred our earthly Eden : in the mad¬ dened anguish of despair, it ahnost be¬ trayed your wrongs and my dishonour. Had your mind been as other minds*— had you not been pure and innocent ae Heaven's angels, you would have sus¬ pected, you vvould have questioned; and in the torn and agitated state of my feel¬ ings, every mystery would have been revealed; you would have known me what I am*—perhaps would have de¬ spised, would have renounced me—per¬ haps-^— " ť< Despised, renounced you !" inter¬ rupting him; "oh, Eugenius Γ' placing my spread hand upon my heart, " your hold here was despotie-^Was eternal! how could I have renounced you and lived? But proceed*, every profession* every
every acknowledgment is precious to røe ; I long to trace the struggles of filial affection: proceed, my friend, and teU me ofyour mother." * € First, Helena," pursued De Beau¬ fort, " I must recall a period of suffer¬ ing, I must bring to your mind the posthouse at Eglissure, and the intro¬ duction of Angerville, You know well the night of horror I passed, and the im¬ patience with which I rose to gain every possible intelligence; you know, that §щр aţ уоцг side I was,,, desponding, wretched; I spoke noWalas! I could not speak : I could only mentally re¬ proach my neglected duties, and in each reproach, your injuries sharpened the sting of my remorse : imagination mag¬ nified the scene of devastation and woe ; my mother outraged, perhaps murdered,, — щу paternal inheritance destroyed— my cousin too, the companion of my infant days» all crowded upon my memory, and fijled my eyes with tears. In a moment
*so desolate, so forforn, I clung tighter to you : I pictured the preservation of my secret as necessary to my existence; for you were all which cruel fete had left me, yoii would be my comforter under affliction, you would share my'sorrows, and be to me the world. " We reached the posthouse, and the appearance öf Angerville banished every recollection of Montmelian and my mo¬ ther: think, to a mind sensitive, and alive to a thousand dreads, the shock of such a meeting ! Angerville knew Hyacinthe, and almost before he had re¬ cognized me, did I feel as though my degradation and my ruin were complete : holy saints! wdiat a new turn did it give to my ideas, when I beheld you pale and senseless at my feet ! I lifted you in my arms, I carried you from the crowd, I looked ťo Angerville for ex¬ planation, nor could I credit his asser¬ tion when he sw r ore, that not till that instant
instant did he know the vvorld contained ^ being so perfect in beauty as yourself Î- " You recovered your reælketion, and the repeated name of JJo Beaufort agam produced agonies almost death-fraught : •deaf to my supplications, convulsed, shrieking, you turned from me, and when bepeath our own roof, the same alarming struggles continued^ fever and delirium succeeded. ** For nights, almost bereft of liope, J watclied by your pillow: pathetic, 'heart-rending were your ravings, yet tliey threw no light upon tlie mystery ; my name mingled in every wandering, but why my name should be coupled with a fatheťs curse, I had yet to learn* Doubt crowded upon doubt; I knew -Hot wliat to think : 'twas evident con* -cealment existed on your side as well as my own: I dared not suspect you— % dared not even in thought sully the pu- «ity of your character ; yet at tune» (why shouid
l&ouJd. I deny it?) I became nearly m frenzied as yourself. " Angerville í^aw and pitied my mi¬ sery; to him I confided the secret of your wrongs, and from him I obtained a promise of şilonce on the past transac¬ tions of my life. Too generous to re¬ proach one already humbled by remorse and woe, Angerville, in the warm lan¬ guage of friendship, tried to reconcile me to myself: he spoke of my union with Hyacinthe as the mere compact of po¬ licy, and protested, that in snatching you from the cojd and joyless penance of a religious cell, I had but espoused the outraged cause of nature, and de¬ stroyed a power unjust because coercive: contrasting the laxity of worldl) prin¬ ciples with the firm rigidity of honour, he impressed the necessity of concealing the fatal bonds which held me, and d.velt so emphatically on the stern laws of vir¬ tue, and the cold unbending decrees of ^utøaged innocence, that I dreaded your discovery
Discovery of my hated mamage more than the blast of death. " The period of trial at length passed away, ahd you, my hearťs friend, were spared to my prayers! Yet when the hour of explanation arrived, I stood be¬ fore you, trembling and dismayed : not a secret did you withhold from me—ah ! how often did I pine to be alike explicit, to sink at your feet, to acknowledge all, and cast myself on yonr love and com¬ passion! But fear withheld me: I lister- ed to the injuries ofyour father, and still the name of Hyacinthe lay buried in my heart '· In my intercourse with the world, I had often heard the romance which had severed the marquis de Chateauroux from his family ; I had heard, that, madly en¬ snared by a tenant's daughter, he had blasted the high hopes of his illustrious name, and that from the precincts of a court, lighted by the fairy torch of love, he had shrunk into insignificance and obscurity :
obscurity : but I knew not the sequel of the story; I knew not that ingratitude had marred his sublunary bliss, and poi¬ soned his intercourse with men! Hea¬ ven knows, I listened to the melancholy disclosure with a countenance death-pale as your own ; for tlie malediction of De Chateauroux, so often and so solemnly denounced, curdled my lifës-blood, when the name of the seducer burst in thun¬ der on my ear: the known irregularities of my father left no room for doubt ; and when, to appease your agitation and hor- ror, I pronounced, *tJie son qf the De Beaufort your father eœecrates is not your husband/ my heart smote me for the mean and despicable subterfuge. " Y^our griei' and your dismay yielded to the soothing endearments of love, and once more did you resume the gentle of¬ fices of domestic duty : but though affec* tion for you was warm, and stable as life itself—though your smite greeted my ap¬ proach, and your society was the haven of vol. il » mv
my wishes, still the patriotic spirit with¬ in me was not to be silenced, and pride and honour incessantly spurned at the dream of indolence into which I had sunk. " Angerville had long since leagued himself vvith a secret meeting at Eglis¬ sure; and I too, zealous in the same cause, quickly became a member. Often, my Helena, in long and useless debates, w as the night wasted—often, in stealing to your side, did I find your pillow steeped in the tears of watchful uneasi¬ ness; yet I hesitated to unfold the en¬ terprise we meditated, lest your coward fears should magnify the danger. Anx¬ ious to cheat you into peace, I dared not raise the veil, till the pow r er of retracting was passed: Montmelian still rang in my ears, and the unknown fate of my mother nerved my arm to vengeance ; I longed to aid in the downfal of despo¬ tism, in the annihilation of the regicides, who, scoffing at the misery of the mar¬ tyred Louis, had deluged the land in blood.
blood. «Ľnbiassed by the blind warm zeal wliich fanned our hopes, Angerville mid myself alike became disgusted vvith the slow inactive plottings of policy, and feeling that power must be opposed to power, strength to strength, vve resolved to quit Eglissure, and enrol ourselves in the little army of Conde. u Panting ibr the moment of action, you, my hearťs friend, -were the only cloud which lowered on my military ar¬ dour: tearing you, as I had torn you from the peaceful isle of your nativity, from the natural protector ofyour youth, how could I abandon vou? how leave you, in a situation whieh endeared you to me, amont? stran «дета, ашопц' dan- gers ? Angerv iile read tue struggle, and quicklv chased every combatting ob¬ stacle, by offering the protection of his mother. ** Removed to b el uif hausen, here, He¬ lena, in this dwelling of comfort and peace, dropping tear for tear, and heav- i) Z ¡ng
ing sigh for sigh, I left you, inwardly resolving, spite of the threat of danger and of death, to ascertain the fate of my mother, by journeying in disguise into Savoy. u I will not shock you with the scenes of devastation and horror which crowded on my eyes, nor with the hair-breadth 'scapes which mocked my darings ; suf¬ fice it to say, with address and skill I baffled the scrutiny of Montesquion's scattered marauders, and reached the neighbourhood of Montmelian, with a heart at variance with tlie assumed com¬ posure of my features· How black, how desolate was the face of that country, be¬ fore so fertile and so smiling ! not a rem¬ nant remained of its past prosperity !— not a spot which marked not the fire of extermmating discordi its rich pastures, its corn-fields, its olive-grounds, its viner yards-—all, all had vanished—trodden under foot—laid waste by the pestilence of anarchy. " Dreadful,
*' Dreadful, annihilating scourge !— wouid but the nations of the earth take warning by an example so late, a retri¬ bution so awful ! Fomented by the fire¬ brand of disaffection, crime steals upon crime, and the artful declaimer, the boasted patriot, too often proves a lurk¬ ing traitor and a relentless assassin. Trembling, horror-struck, I sought the home of roy ancestors—the dwelling which for ages had descended with the proud name of De Beaufort : alas ! nought but a shapeless mass of ruins stood be¬ fore me, black with smoke, and shaken to the foundation«, " Tears filled my eyes—rage and an- guish wrung my heart— e My mother! my mother!' I articulated, springing across the dismantled park, and hurrying towards the ruin : not a vestige of furni¬ ture remained—not one single relic had outlived the fury of revolutionary atro* city : the roof had fallen in, and the late d 3 splendid
splendid apartments were choked tıp with stones and ashes. " Almost fainting, from the excessive pressure of my feelinge, I threw myself on the floor, and as ï buried my face in my hands, groans of bitterest anguish burst from my bosom ; hope feit to die within me, and even your image, my Helena, chased not the leadened torpor of despair : remorse and misery weighed me down ; I had abandoned my trust— I had tarried in distance, vvhen duty and nature summoned me to the protection of my mother! Here, in this dwelling, had she called upon my name—had she blessed me, perhaps, in the conscious¬ ness of abandonment " Magnifying every excess which hu¬ man frailty could devise, I pictured her last agonizing struggle, and started as though the sound of her death-groan had indeed reached my ear. It was not fan¬ cy—it was a sigh, deep, heartfelt! A hand
hand too pressed upon my shoulder ;* and when I looked up, I beheld—not a stran¬ ger, but d'Olbreuse, the grey-headed butler of my mother—he who, in infan¬ cy, had often cradled me in his arms— who, promoting my pastime, had fired my young imagination with deeds of he¬ roes and romances of chivalry. The mingled emotions of amazement and joy bereaved me of all power to speak; I could only grasp Ids hand, fix on him an eye of supphcation, and burst into a passion of tears. ť Poor mourner !' he exclaimed, little conscious of the being before him, * you too, perhaps, have been driven from a blazing home, where all your comforts and all your hopes were wrecked !—you too ------' * D'Olbreuse !' interrupting him, ť my —my—my mother.' * Blessed saints ! my lord, the count de Beaufort!' He dropped upon his D 4 knees—
knees—he raised his withered hands to Heaven. ** I threw iriyself upon his neck—I «tesped him in roy arms, as a son w r ould clasp his father^—* Speak, dOlbreuse,* I sobbed; * roy mother—tell me of ihy «mother? *The eonntess lives/ he whispered; * the young countess, too—both, both in safety-*-—But the very walls have ears Γ looking fearfully around; * and to be de¬ nounced now is ţo be murdered«.' He drew nearer to me—he pointed lo the desolate walls, to the defaced porticoes— * The Virgin be praised," he continued, * befóte the republican banditti opened tiieir thunders upon us, madame de Beaufort and the countess Hyacinthe were safe in Switzerland.' * Why then do I find you «tere, ďOl- hreuse—why tarry among the ruins of our ancient house?' * I eame but to see what the marau¬ ders had spared us,' replied d'Olbreuse. * I return to-morrow to my station.' " The
w The garrulity of the old man would have detained me for hours; but roy heart, lightened of its heaviest weight, gave no time to inaction : I accompanied hiro to the hovel which sheltered hiro from the night dews, and, stretched upon some straw and rubbish, snatched a few hours' repose. Thanks to close disguises, veiling us from recognition, we escaped into Switzerland; and, soon clasped in the arms of my mother, I chased away all fears for niy safety, and heard from her lips every particular of her flight and her afflictions. " In two days I again became a wan¬ derer, nor did I pause till enrolled with the emigrant princes." " Madame de Beaufort is then in Switzerland," I observed; "and Hya¬ cinthe;' hesitating, " poor Hyacinthe, knows she ........ ■ ■ -" " Hyacinthe is happy in the society and affection of roy mother," interrupt¬ ing roe; " secure from danger, and more d 5 than
than ever devoted to the exercises of her faith, her life passes in prayer and pe¬ nance: shuddering at the fearful crimes with which atheism and infidelity have depopulated her native land—listening tú atrocities almost beyond credence, she yet meekly supplicates the return ofthat era, when religion will rebuild her altars, and justice redawn among mankind. But, Heleria," he pursued, anxious to dissipate the cloud of sadness which lower¬ ed on roy brow, " you speak not of my military career? Intent on mere indi¬ vidual suffering, you ask not the move¬ ments and organization of our armies?" " Alas !" I faltered, and a tear I could no longer suppress trickled down my cheek, " the movements of armies and the policy of princes were all alike lost in contemplating the interesting saint, who, little dreaming of her injuries, prays for universal peace and universal pardon ! Forgive me, De Beaufort, but the gentle virtues ofthe injured Hyacinthe fill me vvith
with regret and self-reproach : had she been proud, captious, disdainful—had she been aught but what she is, the bur¬ den of my shame had been lighter." "Remember, my Helena," eagerly rejoined Eugenius, " Hyacinthe pos¬ sesses what she ever possessed—my es¬ teem, my respect: when, as the pliant tool of arbitrary custom, I fulfilled the fatal compact which policy had forged, I ceded to lier no m< e ; my heart w r as un¬ influenced—-the magic extaeies of love it was for you alone to awaken. Had I never visited Sicily, my life might have glided down the calm current of content; but when my eyes first rested upon you, my feelings arbitrarily told me, more than content was necessary to my happi- niss. 'Tis I then who should bend be¬ neath the burden of sin : yet is the sin so sweet, that I would not forego it to be master of the world, Think not then of Hyacinthe, roy angel friend, but lis- D 6 ten
ten whilst I tell you wliat we owe to Angerville, *' Exposed to a thousand mortifica¬ tions and insults, the lot of the unfortu¬ nate emigrants has been marked vvith privation and endurance; state policy has marred our hopes—chicanery and in¬ trigue blighted our expeetations—But why linger over the cold and heartless cabals of power? Despised and dispers¬ ed, with * a nerve of rire,' but a force puerile and inefficient, we alone could mourn what we could not redress ; and, yielding to the stern fiat of destiny, thou¬ sands who would have imbrued the fall¬ ing throne in their own life's blood, have been compelled to shrink in obscurity, and die unknown. " Alas ! feeble are my efforts to por¬ tray half the indignities and half the mi¬ series whicli mark the changed fortunes of my suffering countrymen : exiled in poverty and wretchedness—scattered upon
upon the wide face of the earth, in their hearts, in their memories, the recollec¬ tions of home will linger, spite of the burning blush excited at the disgrace of an ungrateful country. Unequal to the task of portraying my own feel¬ ings or their wrongs, I must be content to lament, without again diverging from the common theme of self. " Alike devoted to the cause of our outraged monarch, glowing with patriot¬ ism, and panting for the moment of ac¬ tion, Angerville and myself clung to the belligerent powers, and voluntarily brav¬ ing every danger, owned but one aim and one impulse ; bleeding at every pore, goaded with wrongs and with misfor¬ tunes, we pined to humble the proud boasts of Europe's common enemy, to drive back the vaunting legions of regi- cides^and traitors. " In a skirmish with an advanced guard of the republican army, my Ufe had nearly paid the forfeit of temerity ; heedless
heedless of superior numbers, I rashly hazarded an attack, and at the moment that the sword of a gendarme was point¬ ing at my breast, Angerville felled him to the earth. Again, in the same day, did he, by personal valour, disperse the picket by which I was environed, and, at the imminent risk of himself, rescue me from w r orse than death—from impri¬ sonment, from an ignominious execution ; for the national convention adjudges death to every Frenchman taken in arms." " Heroic, generous, godlike Anger¬ ville !" I exclaimed, pressing to my lips the hand of De Beaufort : " vet, alas! in these moments of peril, how little, how very little, was the poor Helena re¬ membered Γ " Ъу Heaven you wrong me !" ardent¬ ly resumed Eugenius, " not onco were yon banished from' my thoughts—Oh no, no! had I died, your name had been the last sigh upon my lips—your image the only
only charm which could have lured roe back to earth !" " The saints be praised, you are safe now!" I murmured, chasing away the tears wdiich dimmed my eyes ; " secure in this happy shelter, the sword of war must be sheathed, nor must you, even in thought, play truant more." " I vvill be rash no more, my Helena," said De Beaufort ; " beyond I dare not promise." Alas ľ the import of his words froze me—a fearful presage pressed upon my spirits, and told me the season of trial was not vet closed : I fixed on him a look of mingled reproach and entreaty, I pointed to our slumbering cherub, I could not speak, but nature's appeal was eloquent " Spare me, Helena !" he implored ; " rive not a heart which loves you with a passion almost idolatrous ! Remember the duties of my station, bear in mind, a soldier
a soldier survives not an imjmtation o& his courage." I shuddered—I turned mournfully away, for in his flushed eheek, in his ef¬ fulgent eyes, I read a fire, a character whieh put to flight the fond dreams of peace I had mentally courted: every fairy vision faded, every rainbow tint which in anticipation had faintly che¬ quered the dreary path of my existence ; in the patriotic frenzy of Eugenius I traced the grave of my hopes; for, alas! what to me was life, if deprived of his protection? unknowing and unknown, an alien from my father's arms, a w an¬ derer frorn шу native land, what joy be¬ yond him eoujd I picture—«what anchor could I rest on? " Helena !" exclaimed De .Beaufort,» eager to dissipate every appearance of .sorrow, i( guess you it was our good ge¬ nius m the shape of Angerville, who t $uroroo»ed roe hither ? He weU knew, where
where tlie treasure rests the heart ever lingers, and that to a man despoiled of his treasure, life and glory itself become rayless : judge then iny feelings, when by the letter of Angerville I found you were ill, delirious, scorched with fever, and lost to every sense of .recognition. Oppressed with doubt and dismay, wild* frenzied almost as yourself, I petitioned leave, and few to tend you; for ah! what power eould restrain a mind so fond, a friend so faithftil? I hung over you, but you knew me not—I called on you, but you answered not; some cold, some fearful cloud hung upon your senses, and every past sorrow, every mourned affliction, was bHss, compared to vvhat I then endured. In the gay spring of youth, in the meridian blaze of beauty, you were not half so precious to me^-Oh,,iio» no I the melancholy lan¬ guor ofyour dark eyes, the faded lustre of your wan cheek, betrayed the strag¬ gles of a mind, whose virtues and whose injuries
injuries with remorse and torture wrung^ every fibre of my soul. Affection had outlived thé trance of passion, and that homage whieh the exquisite charms of your person had awakened, Imd yielded to stable and permanent interest : it was your innocence, your unbounded confi¬ dence^—it was the brilliant lustre of a roind, a heart beyond all price, which bound me to you in a tefeli which no human power could dissolve; judge then the almost-mortal anguish with which I heard you pronounce the name of Hya¬ cinthe— with which I heard you call up¬ on Heaven to snatch you from the snares of an adulterer ? Holy Mary ! it was a deatb-iWarrant to hope, worse than the pang which dissolves soul and body. ** Subdued, humbled, heart-broken, I tbrewimyself on the floor—I hid my face in the dust-**~I prifyed for tiie return of your reason, even if the stern decree of virtue sliould tear you from me. You did revive—reason chased the wild sha¬ dows
dows of delirium ; you spoke in a voice low and sweet ; you blessed and fondled our babe, and hope once more visited the breast of her wretched father : when you called upon my name, I trembled, but I stood before you ; when you asked nie if it was all a dream, I answered not, but I read nothing like hatred in your countenance. Helena, you know all : the mask" of deception has faded ; covered with crime, transgression, and weakness, I bend before you, as to a judge whose integrity must condemn, but whose mercy is infinite. Helena, disappoint not the hopes of an acknow r - ledged self-humbled culprit—remember, oh remember, every error claims hirth in love" De Beaufort sunk on his knees before me, he clasped my hands in his, he gazed on me with that melting look of suppli¬ cation with which he lured me from the home of my father : I could not speak, my feelings were in arms—my heart swollen
swollen to suffocation.—" Pardon, par- don, my Helena!" he murmured. Still voice was denied me; sobbing, I hung over him, and as I deluged his fece with roy tears, I suffered him to «natch me unresisting to his bosom.
CHAPTER II.
«Sotported by DeBeaufort, I descended .tothe parlour, my cheeks flushed with the. hectic of fever, and my hands and arms emaciated and sallow: alive to nought but love, I smiled upon his cares, roy eyes were fixed upon his face, and the pendent tear of sensibility spoke gra¬ titude and transport* The congratulatory accents of Anger*. -ville recalled me to myself ι his cheek too waâ pallid, his form care-worn, and when I extended my hand, his felt to tremble
tremble at the touch. Aks ! I guessed not the nature of hm emotion—-I sus-» pected not the cruel, the accursed snare, working the total overthrow of his ho* nour and roy peace. In the absence of Eugenius, he accused himself as the au-» thor of roy sufferings; he execrated that impetuosity, that want of caution, which had nearly deprived roe of life, and insi¬ diously animadverting on the past actions of his friend, he mourned his dereliction from the straight broad path of rectitude, and sought to solve my conclusions and my designs.—" If De Beaufort has erred beyond the reach of pardon," he exclaim¬ ed, " if I have rudely severed the tie which bound you to each other, how can I offer reparation—how heal the wounds of outraged feeling? Unfortunate Helena ! lovely fatal tempter ! if the zeal of friendship can appease, if the active energy of brotherly love can mollify, tax roe even.to the verge of Hfe; remerober 'tis I whq have torn you from happiness —who*
*~who havo betrayed the trust of confi* dence—who have doomed your future years to regret and woe. Oh Helena !" and the sighs he heaved, and the tears he shed, might well have baffled suspi¬ cion, α tell me how to avert the evil, which blind interest, and compassion for your injuries, have produced ?" I suffered him to take my hand, to press it to his lips and to his forehead ; nor did any thing like apprehension steal into my heart, when with the warm glow of seeming disinterestedness he conti¬ nued—¿" Should the storms of the world wreck your hopes, should your expecta¬ tions founder midst the general ruin, whÄst I have breath I will protect your little Eugenia : I will be her guardian, her parent ; I will study her comfort, I will watch over her welfare, I------" " Thanks, thanks* generous Anger- viHe !" interrupting him ; " but De Beau¬ fort abandons not his charge ; and whilst Heaven grants to my prayers the pre¬ cious
cious life of De Beaufort, Eugenia needs no other guardian·" He started—lie dropped roy hand ; a heavy cloud lowered on his brow—a mortal paleness chased the dapple4 ver¬ meil of his cheek : terrified, I sprung from my seat—" You are «Ц1, Anger¬ ville," I exclaimed, and then I would have hastened to the door, but he re¬ strained me. " A faintness—no more," forcing a smile.: " alas ! I was picturing tlie hor¬ rors which now outrage my wretched country, and trerobling lest misery and violence should extend even here : hut De Beaufort—my happy friend—his pardon is pronounced—his peace is no longer threatened; I have not marred his sublunary bliss—I have not severed the bonds of faithful love ?" " Oh no !" I eagerly resumed ; " De Beaufort has acknowledged all—-his fears and his struggles, his motives and his concealments: tlie victim of cruel and arbitrary
tale of his early life, and expel him my heart? De Beaufort is forgiven, and I, Angerville," turning aw^ay my face, and deeply blushing, "I шт content bø »live» tø* f 4&*-j» hesitating—"to sacrifice eveii fame for his arTectbn! Aksl let not уошг austere principlee condemn me \ expose ще ndt to your vatuoasiitother. I know, I feel what I am ; but torn from X>e Beaufort I cannot live." ^M^yiűmyl" nuinnured^Angerville; * whkat & tøve, what a heart is here ! De* ^oiledof every poĂsession, bereft of every promised good,* enthroned in the soul's 8oul~of Helena, thy fate, De Beaufort, rivate the tidiest potentates on earth! Oh fyi such a friend ] oh for such a so¬ lace!" and striking his clenched hand against his forehead, he paced the cham* her with quick аЫ di-^rdered ^iteps. Astonished, confouftded, I gazed at him~l sat in trembling expectation. suddenly peuiaig—" Your pardon, ami¬ able
able Helena," he continued ; " yet when I confess that I have loved, that I do l<w*>~ with an aidour boundless as your own, with an idolatry almost saeriligeous, condemn not the frantic gust of feeling. Unpitied^. unrequited, the angel I wor¬ ship is fost to my prayers—she knows not the deadly conflicts which rend roy frame, she guesses not the damning whirlwind of passions which her smile engenders ; I have struggled, I do struggle, but tlie poison works ; it mingles with roy vitals, it corrupts all my principles, it hurries roe to tlie blackening verge of perdi· tion.* " Holy saints !" I articulated, " is there no hope—no compassion ? Con a woman thus beloved sport with human misery ? can she know her power without pity-·*- witiiout return ?" " I hope not—I think not," quickly rejoined Angerville; "yet faas fear sealed my lips, and circumstances awed the wish of confession: in the camp, ъй m vol. и. e retirement,
retirement, her image pursues me; in my dreams, as in my day-viòions, bhe colours im .gination—she desolates every dawn of promise ! Oh, my friend !" and again he took my hand, and stcxnl trem¬ bling before me, *· in the blissful cer¬ tainty of happy prosperous love, you cannot guess the pangs vvhich one soli¬ tary selfish passion inflict 1 »." " Surely," I argued, feelingly interest¬ ed in his sorrows, " a Jove like yours yields not to common difficulties?—the untold tale warrants not despair. Go, Angerville, seek out the Eve of vour paradise; the heart unguarded by pre¬ possession yields to perseverance: fear ïiot —she eannot view with cold indiffe¬ rence an attachment so pure, so ardent." " What if her heart be guarded ?" he interrogated, vvith a palsied stmt. " He¬ lena, touch not that chord—it reaches here," pointing to his brain, " it threatens f ur v—madness !" " Pride and reason offer the antidote," I rejoined,
I rejoined, viewing him with amaze¬ ment: " trust me, the heart can know but one love ; however it may be warp¬ ed by the world—however it may be blinded by circumstances, its sensibilities and its hopes aro alike despotic : if you would spare yourself years of regret, brave no more the danger ; the vvoman capable of change is unworthy your af¬ fection—the vvoman faithful to her firt vow can yield you nought but pity." " True,' said Angerville, breathing a heavy sigh, " pity is a poor cold ofier¬ ing, but friendship, ethereal friendship, holds forth a brig liter promise. In the active scenes of life I vvill trv to chase the lure of passion—aiding ¡n the com¬ mon cause, be self-sacrificed at the shrine of patriotism. In the hour of peril I vvill woo an emancipation from sorrow, I vvill rush into the thickest ofthe thronsr«. I will dare the swords of n\y misguided countrymen; and should I fall, bethe E £¿ heart
heart of friendship my memorial ! For¬ give røe, Helena—waste not your tears ona being so forlorn ; promise, only pro¬ mise me to bury the confession of my weakness in your own bosom—to hide it even from the ear of iny mother; clieat lier into content, and witatever be my fate, gratefully will I bless you." " And De Beaufort," I exclaimed, " must he too be debarred your confi¬ dence—must he believe his friend hap- py?" " Not for the universe must De Beau¬ fort guess my secret," hastily rejoined Angerville. " Once in the retirement of Eglissure I dared arraign his conduct; knowing Hyacinthe, I accused him of dishonour, of perfidy to you ; I—I—" hesitating; и no, no, Helena, whilst I live, De Beaufort must not know the strange coincidence in our destinies." " Alas ! what coincidence can be traced between the destinies of De Beaufort and
and yourself?" I mournfully asked : " if Dc Beaufort vvere as free—if no barrier —if no fatal tic—if—if------" He snatched my hand—" Helena,'' he pronounced, lowering his voice to a whisper, "you shall know all—not a se¬ cret, not a trial shall be withheld: open as your own pure mind, my heart shall be laid before you—its inmost folds, its hulden sorrows; then, Helena, judge, and tt II ree whether í liave not cause to curse ihe cohiv idence in our deátinies : Ле Bcaufo t is the husband of ilvaeintim — tlie won::» n I madi v idolize is the wife v' of another.'*' lie paused, he gazed wildly olì me. ΐ coulcl not speak, í could not breathe a single reproach : alas ! how could I ? how could the humbled mistress of Oe Beaufort arraign the counterpart of her own actions? Guilty, heart-struck, I couhl only bury my face in my bosom. and shrink and tremble like a self-: Ьа.чч! L 3 tu Irrit
culprit. Merciful Powers ! what a war of feelings rushed upon my brain ! my own dishonour—the wrongs of my fa¬ ther—the fall of my mother, all com¬ bined, all bent me a suppliant at the feet of Angerville. He would have raised me, but I repulsed him. " First hear me," I exclaimed, " when on my knees I sue for a being to whose very name I am a stranger. Who, like myself, can warn you from the precipice upon whicli you totter? Spurn not an experienced guide ; fly from the snare of her beauty ^-renounce the lure of her conversation —dare not the treacherous incitements of your own heart ! Angerville, have mercy on a being weaker than yourself! sap not her principles—assail her not with the honeyed poison of sophistry— plunge not a soul in guilt. Angerville, as you shall answer at the great bar of Heaven, inflict not on a sensitive mind the degradation I now endure." "Fear
ťí Fear not, Helena* !" he emphatically pronounced ; " her heart is guarded by another love—she need not flv me." My mother arose to my " mind's eye." and the guard even of a husband's arms appeared feeble-*-" Alas !" I resumed, "you know not the weakness of our nature : if you vvould live to honour, if you would spare the unfortunate being wdio now tyrannizes over your feelings, do not approach, do not assail her." Angerville started; his cheek crim¬ soned, his eyes flashed fire, and a smile of wild joy played upon his countenance. " Bear in mind her heart is guarded," he repeated, İn accents scarcely articu¬ late. " Blessed Mary ! how slight, how pe¬ rishable is the guard of virtue !" I ex¬ claimed,, unmindful of his emotion ; M temptation* is deadly: look around the world—behold the thousands who, secure in an imagined guard, have fallen in the toils of the seducer. Desolate Ε Ί. homes—
homes — forsaken children — ou t raged husbands, proclaim the witchery of flat¬ tery, the force of passion." ** Your victory is complete," said An¬ gerville, " your arguments conclusive : at Eglissure I yielded the freedom of my heart. Sweet Mentor ! angelic rea¬ söner ! I will go no more to Eglissure— I will dare no more the danger. Here, beneath the roof of my mother, in the society of my soul's friend, here will I seek to extract tlie poison: bear with me then, and in the mild alleviations of iriendship let me seek a solace." Fool, fool that I was ! I guessed not , the surreptitious covering—I deciphered not the burning glance of passion. Pity¬ ing the perversity of fortune, I watched him with a sister's feelings—studious for Ids comfort, my attention and my anx¬ iety were devoted to the like office ; ami when I saw him smile, 1 felt as though , my assiduities, were repaid. In him I beheld the yictim of sensibiUty, the slave of
of an unfortunate passion, combated by reason, reproved by duty ; in him I traced all that was estimable, all that was truly great ; for his struggles were the guarantees of his probity, and bis perse¬ verance the sure prelude of a victory over self. Such was the fatal delusion under' which the league of confidence was established ; and such w T as my firm trust in the principles of Angerville, that the safetv and the lives of those most precious to me, unhesitatingly W T ould I have entrusted to his friendship.* " Alas !" I vvould exclaim; when men¬ tally 7 musing o'er the past scenes of early infatuation, " thy cautions, Angerville, vvere useless and unnecessary : how, with¬ out a tacit reproach, could I breathe thy sorrows into the ear of De Beaufort ? how paint the disinterestedness of thy passion, without refTectrng'on his own? Oh no, no! sooner would I die than in¿ flict pain on De Beaufort; for however 4 I'may reverence the cold sacrifices of v 5 honour,
honour, love pleads his cause, and stampe hb pardon, ttow feeble roust be the flame now glowing in the breast cf An- gemHev-how different to that which propelled the actions of my Eugenius t had he listened to tiie dictates of reason, had he repressed the incitement» of the heart, I had been a sister of Santa Ma¬ ria di Tindaro; I had been— happy! Oh no, no! not happy; drooping, spiritless, complaining, I had dragged tbe heavy chain of life, without gratitude and without hope. Oh, roy God ! pardon the error of ignorance—visit me not witb thy wrath, because I am too weak to Weak from the trammels by which I am encompassed ! Can virtue demand so much—ean, honour accept no lighter atonement ? v I turned my eyes upon roy cherub; she smüed in her sleep, and though roy tears streamed upon her tender face, the dumber ofinnocence remaroed unbroken- -τ-" Ah ! co%ld I deprive thee of thy father?
father? could I bereave thy infancy of his support? Oh no, no!" dropping on my knees beside her, " compassion for thy helplessness forbids such a decision : life and love, De Beaufort, will expire in the same gasp. Sleep on, my babe^— ho the morning of thy youth unclouded! lulled in the arms, in the hearts of thy natural protectores may no fearful storm arise, no shoals, no quicksands, to en¬ gulph thy innocence and peace ! Nature binds thy mother to thee—mercy forbids a banishment from thy father's arms." How often thus does the pliant dis¬ ciple of error find justification for tres¬ pass! how, clinging to the admitted frailties of humanity, does she draw the veil of indulgence over the too-visible deviations from morality and honour '
r. 6 CHAP-
CHAPTER III. Dethroned by the rude pressure of calamity, by the overwhelming gust of disappointment and outraged feeling* long was it ere the pale rose of health redawned upon my cheek, and longer still ere the truant smile cheated the anx¬ iety of watchfulness. -Alas ! there are sorrows which barile the searching eye, there are woes which, shrinking from disclosure, prey on the spirits, and stag» nate the glowing energies of youth. I buried in iny own breast the aching thorns of self-reproach—I tried to silence the appeals of conscience—I tried, in the warm sophistry of love, to palliate transgression, to soften even the con¬ sciousness of disobedience; but the at¬ tempt was vain : often in the midnight hour.
hour, when sleep mocked solicitation, did the image of my father rise in judg 4 - ment against me—often did his curse mix in the night breeze, and curdle the warm blood at my heart : sometimes in my dreams he would bid me fly my se¬ ducer—sometimes, beckoning to the al¬ tar of my worship, he would bid me repent and live—then, decked in the cold stern frown of an incensed judge, he vvould tear my cherub from my arms, or pointing his sword to the heart of De Beaufort, bid me in tears and penance expiate the past Sohbing, trembling, I would start from my pillow, and look around to see whe¬ ther it was indeed imagination whieh had conjured the frightful phantom; then convinced by the whispered soothings of Eugenius that it was nought but the busy coinage of the brain, I would try to regain composure, or rather chase away the influence of sleep by watching foe the glare of morning, Often
Often would my own sorrows yield to the buried woes of Angerville, to that strange confession which had excited both compassion and regret: he too burnt with an unholy flame—he too harboured a delusion dangerous to honour and to peace ; but he struggled against its in¬ roads, he strained every power of reso¬ lution to expunge the error. His ex¬ ample was bright, was transcendent; but to roy fevered imagination it savoured more of heroism than nature^—it seemed more worthy of respect than imitation— it betrayed a stoicism, a philosophy, which accorded not with that enthusiasm which¿ fanned hi infancy, sapped and moulded every principle I possessed. My beart had no room for the cold må «niropassioned ; sensibility was the key t#itsoonf^nee—impulse the touch¬ stone tò its favour. Oh, dangerous and pernicious dream ! fatal snare to honour and repose! diligently should the hand of instruction nip the germ—diligently should
should reason strive to expel the poison. Sensibility, tempered and regulated by judgment, is a sweet, a thrilling attri¬ bute of Heaven ; like the gentle shower, it enriches where it flows—it sheds the genial ray of beneficence and favour: hut wild, impulsive, uncurbed, as the whirlwind it lays waste—it desolates— it ravages all that the fairest hopes could picture. Well might the good, the exs- emplary madame Angerville say it was the bane of comfort—well might she caution me to curb its growing influence» and seek to wean me from ÍU encou¬ ragement, as though I werfe the child of her own bosom—well might she implore me to rouse every latent power of roy mind, telling roe the woes of tiiis life needed resolution «more tlian tears г per¬ haps she read the dark colour of roy fete —perhaps she sought to strengthen roe against the hour of triaL t The chilling frost of winter had rap¬ ped every hud of vegetation, the wind whistled
whistted through the leafless boughs, and* '* Shadows vast, Deep tıçıgd, suiţi d^iup a«d cougrcgated clouds, Aud all the vapours tmlxileuce oť heav «, Invulv'd the face of tlung-b." Without, all was comfortless and dreary —within, all was doubt and anxiety : fresh ftimours* gathered, and each day brought tidings of tbe depraved and bloody strides of treason. Dreadful, la*· mentable, was the fate of the royal pri¬ soners—indignity crowded upon indig* rrity—and all that malice could invent, and cruelty devise, were essayed to torn¬ irne and tohumbie. Tom from the lawful partner of his sorrows—great amid the wreck of his fbrturre, the per¬ secuted, the magnanimous Louis, was vulnerable tu^through the sufferings of Уз family r he had no tears for himself, no regrets ; he pardoned his persecutors —he prayed for the ^ welfare of liissub- jeets*-i4he dreaded disgraceiof the nation was
tvas the bitterest ingredient in his cup of misfortune ; he could have quaffed it —he did quaff it to the very dregs, but the deep, the eternal, the irremediable »slur upon the honour of France, was galling to the king and the patriot " Execrable monster !" exclaimed De Beaufort, perusing in the public journals the enormities ofthe abandoned Orleans ; " outvying his contemporaries in horror and in guilt—violating all ties of con¬ sanguinity and feelmg—outraging ,«¿11 laws of humanity and justice—can a heart so black be eased in human mould? Alas! how must it aggravate the arffic tion of the monarch, to trace a relative hand in the mortal blow! surrounded by ruffians and traitors, by all who aye hateful and base, the ingratitude of an imagined friend implants a thorn which must for ever rankle." " Innocence and rehgion will support him through the trial," fenvently articu¬ lated madame Angerville; " even in death
death the royal Louis will triumph o'er his enemies," " In death !" echoed De Beaufort ; " saints and martyrs !" raising his clasped hands; " dare they sacrilegiously blas¬ pheme the ordinances of Heaven—dare they attempt the sacred life of majesty ?" " Alas!" observed madame Anger¬ ville, " the uncurbed and licentious pas¬ sions of men ow r n no law r —wild as the wind, they dare and execute ; and Pro¬ vidence, for some all-wise and hidden purpose, permits the excesses of their fury." " The sprmgs of the human heart lie buried," emphatically pronounced An¬ gerville ; " the propelling spur to defal¬ cation is known but to the plotter," " Be the spur what it may," ardently rejoined madame Angerville, " may Heaven's curse light on the defalcators ! entangled in their own toils, may misery, and confusion, and remorse, and disap¬ pointment, be their inheritance for ever ! may
may their last hour be rayless, and may the tears of the orphan, and the lamen¬ tations of the widow, hang like a mildew on their hopes ! may------" " Hold, hold !" interrupted Anger¬ ville, springing from his seat, and wildly grasping the arm of his mother; his fea¬ tures assumed a pale and livid hue—-»a cold dew hung upon his forehead—and every limb shook with the palsy of agi¬ tation. " What have I said ?" faltered madame Angerville, gazing with terror on her son. " Charles, dear Charles, what have I said to wound you ?" " Nothing, nothing," quickly repeated Angerville, and pressing his hand to his forehead, he darted out of the room. De Beaufort hastened after him ; and the afflicted mother, surprised and dis¬ mayed, sinking on a chair, burst into tears.—·" Alas !" she sobbed, " what new misfortune tiireatens ? some hidden grief preys
preys on the Spirits of my son, and changes him almost beyond my know¬ ledge." I could not speak—I knew the hidden grief, but I dared not betray hils confi¬ dence. " 1 remember him so much the reverse of what he now is," pursued the dis¬ tressed mother, " that my heart sickens in the contemplation ; so gay—so happy —so every thing we look for in youth ; his cheeks glowing—his eyes sparkling —his features beaming the emanations of his mind : now he is full of care and distempered melancholy; moping and pale, he would rather wander alone among the mountains, than join the social haunts of friendship. Often at night, instead of seeking his pillow, he steals away from the house, and wanders, spite of the cold wind, until I am almost numb¬ ed in watching his return— oftén^ -----" * Bæs Angerville wander at* night fioro.
from his own home?" I asked, inter¬ rupting her; " does he fan remembrance even to his own undoing?" " What remembrance ?" fearfully in¬ terrogated madame Aiigerville—" Alas ! what action of his past life can militate against repose?" " Circumstances may produce unhap¬ piness," í observed, " without our ac**. ttons rising in judgment against us; sor¬ row may assail, and still the conscience remain unspotted." " True," mournfully rejoined madame Angerville, '· vve may be unhappy, but not comfortless—the spirit may be de-. jected, but the heart will not despond. I know that youth is buoyant—that sanguine anticipation stretches beyond probability—that hope soars upon fairy wings—Alas ! I know also, that in seek¬ ing to pluck the rose, vve ofteii grasp the. thorn—that in basking beneath the sun-, shine, we see not the gathering terepest destined
destined tocŕush us Ш tlie dust. r Why thé joys åtta^triab ofthk life aire thus blended—why eakrhiťý so often daáies all its promises, religion enjoins us not to^srft : sojourning in pain and grief, we mušt bow to the dispensations of Provi¬ dence, and though s the race is not al¬ ways* tø the swift, nor the battle to the strong,* we roust rely upon that Omni¬ potent Hand which alike dispenses good and evil." " Excellent woman !" I ejaculated, gazing on her with reverence and admi¬ ration ; " may the remnant of your life be unchequered and smooth! may no lurking ill break upon the repose of vir¬ tue, or dissipate a serenity whicli piety alone can ensure !" " Thank you, thank you, my esteem¬ ed young friend," forcing a faint smile : " individually, I am alive but to the wel¬ fare of roy son—generally, sorrow festers in the dishonour and faH of roy country:
as a patriot, I ought to know no other care, but the feelings of a mother cannot be blunted." " Oh, Angerville !" I mentally sighed, gazing on the softened expression of her speaking features, " reason must prevail, and the peace of such a mother aid in the total extermination of this fatal passion." The return of _De Beaufort checked my reply ; and the nearly-breathless in¬ quiry of madame Angerville spoke the interest and anxiety of her heart. " Banish every fear, my dear madam," said Eugenius, " Angerville is well : too ardent in the cause he espouses, so acutely does he feel the wrongs and in¬ dignities of the royal sufferers, that he declares at times it goads him almost to madness." " Is there no other cause ?" inquired the doubtful mother—" no nearer, no keener source of sorrow ?" " What nearer, what keener source of sorrow can exist?" asked De Beaufort;. " the
" the monarch we adore surrounded by an infernal crew of murderers and des¬ pots—the land of our fathers ransacked and disgraced?" " True, true," murmured madame Angerville ; " yet I shall never forget lus look and his accent: alas! how will he bear the confirmation of what now he can only fancy ?" ** As in this world we bear what we cannot avert," said De Beaufort, shud¬ dering. " I too could almost yield to frenzy, when I think of wdiat now may be acting." " What is acting," solemnly rejoined madame Angerville; " for never but with blood will the demons be satisfied. But your friend, De Beaufort—where is my Charles ? direct me, that I may urge resignation and patience." " Do you seek him, and bring him hither, my love," said De Beaufort, turn¬ ing to roe : " I left him at the hall-door, mote submissive and more composed." Thus
Thus authorized, I waited not a se¬ cond bidding, but wrapping myself irt my shawl, hurried on the mission of friendship, eager to awaken Angerville to the fears of his mother. The hall door was still open, but Angerville was not there. Fearless of the cold wind, I flew into the garden, and, looking around, beheld him vvith his head uncovered and his arms folded, standing on a rough point, which overhung the river. Quick as thought I sprang to his side—" An¬ gerville!" I exclaimed, and then paused, for his start, and the expression of his countenance, terrified me. " Helena, is it you ?" he said, in a voice so hollow, that it seemed to issue from the deepest recesses of his heart; *· leave me—leave me, lest I forget my¬ self!" , " No, I cannot leave you here, my friend," I replied; " let us return tog©. ther. This indulgence of woe is wrong and dangerous: your mother—*—" vol. h. r " My
" My mother, cursed me!" he wildly rejoined: " I hear it still—I feel it in my brain and in my heart" " Cursocl you, Angerville ?" I articu¬ lated : " alaf ! you know not what you say. Your mother cursed the dissemi¬ nators of treason—the plotters against the realm—the accusers of the king." " True," shuddering, " it was not me she cursed; I remember it all: par¬ don me, my gentle friend, I scarce know what I say—I am strangely disordered; I believe my reason is nearly gone : my temples throb, and my heart—only feel how it beats !" snatching my hand, and pressing it on his bosom. " Helena," he continued, forcibly retaining it, " did you ever feel a heart beat like mine? did you ever behold a frame so racked, so tortured as mine ? Answer me, He¬ lena," and his eyes were rivetted on me, ** am I not more deserving of pity than anger?" 4 * Heaven knows I do pity you, An¬ gerville,"
gerville," I replied : " and yet, my friend, if you would take judgment and not feeling for your guide—if you would de*. tach your thoughts from what must be painful, how soon would you regain your tranquillity !" "Never, never!" exclaimed Anger¬ ville, with a fervour which made me tremble; " passion has murdered tran¬ quillity!—the world has no charm to offer!" " Oh, fie, fie !" endeavouring to rally his dejection; " vvould you turn ancho¬ rite, and live on herbs and berries?" " Would to Heaven," he resumed, " such had been my destined portion !" "What, in youth? Would you re¬ linquish all your ties—would you for¬ swear the world in youth ?" " Yes, joyfully, to have escaped the fallacy of its promises." " Say not so, Angerville," I implored : " because you have marred your own happiness, be not ungrateful for the г α blessings
bîessijugs you possess. Talents like yours ought tiot to be buried in obscurity—rea¬ son like yours cannot be exerted in vain." « ," Iţeason cannot blunt the ardour of feeling!" şx claimed Angerville; "and feeling has becoine my curse—my bane. Alas! you know not the despair, the mortal struggles in my bosom! So weary am I of life, that I could almost plunge into the w r ave, to rid me of the burden ! I should like to die, but not alone : even in the grave I would cling ţo the solace of friendship! Helena," and he grasped my arm, and hurried to the very brink of the precipice, " shall we plunge into the wave together?" " Merciful Heaven ! Angerville," strug¬ gling, almost shrieking, " would you commit a double murder?—would you destroy your soul? Think ofyour un¬ fortunate mother—think of De Beau¬ fort—tbink of my infant!" " Fear not, Helena," relaxing bis hold, and smUing at my terror, # * I would not harm
harm thee to be sovereign of the uni- versej Oh no, no—my mother, my exemplary mother, shall not yet cursé the hour of my existence ? Forgive me, my gentle friend : alas Γ I am nearly as wild as the elements!" and again he moved towards the precipice, and again his eyes bent on the dark and perturbed stream. The sky seemed to lower— the wind moaned through the leafless branches, and the Rhine, swOllen almost to a torrent, sullenly dashed against the base of the rock upon whieh he seemed to totter. " What do you meditate, Angerville?' 1 I demanded, snatching his arm, and trembling with cold and horror. " I dare not leave you here—and to remain longer is to destroy me." I believe my voice and my looks were more eloquent than my words, for in an instant he was softened ; and springing to my side, he petitioned my forgive¬ ness, and urged to support me. F 3 « It
. " It is not my forgiveness you should ask, Angerville," I exclaimed; 'Galas' you should humble yourself before, a much higher tribunal. Remember >ve are ai ^vverable for our thoughts—and in thought you have impiously warred against the ordinations of Heaven. Oh, my friend, never again let despair urge a decision so fatal: pray for'submission •—pray for fortitude ! AVe are told, that our trials are never beyond our strength, that virtue holds forth a road of*escape to every bincere suppliant." " Helena, Helena," gazing on me with an eye of fire, <% is it you who thus argue ? who thus coldly reprove the wayward passions of others? Strange inconsis¬ tency! Is it you------" He paused—he feared to wound me. " Alas, Angerville !" I mournfully re¬ joined, '' I interpret the reproach your lips cannot utter. You would say, ex¬ ample is better than precept—that the vvavercr sliould reform lier own ways, ere
ere she condemn the flights of others î Ye% oh yes, I feel tlie reproof in 'my heart ; and yet I dare urge you, by every power of reason and of feeling, to abjure the baleful snare ! Guilty and frail as I am, I would dwell on innocence and ho·- nour, and check the backslidings of a friend as though I had never felt the smart ! Think not then of my sins, but think rather how to regain the peace you have blindly forfeited !" " Your sins Γ exclaimed Angerville, with a heavy sigh : " would to Heaven, like yours, mine were the sins of igno¬ rance!—would to Heaven, like you, I could look into my own thoughts, and not shudder at their blackness! The hour may yet dawn, vvhen you, even you, may execrate the compassion vvhich drew me from yon precipice. Helena, I am a wretch—my passions and ray feelings are wild, and thougii I struggle, all hell is in my bosom : remember that there are demons let loose amoncr man- г é kind !—
krod^fhere are evfl spirits permitted to tempt and to torture !" φ " True¿" I exclaimed; "but the Al¬ mighty Ruler of heaven and earth fur- nislies a shield superior to their foree and their machinations, * Chir own passions are tbe evil spirits which beset us; be those passions curbed, and we are safe. Qh, yield not the warfare! Remember, he who conquereth himself, conquereth more than an army í Your mother sus¬ pects not tlie thorn which rankles in your heart—let her not suspeet it: he watchful of her peace, and may your virtuous struggles fo ensure it restore your own ! Now let us return to the house," passing ray arm through his: " she expects you, Angerville ; and, oh í assume a smile, in pity to her feelings !" " Not yet^—not yet," eagerly repeated Angerville, quickening his pace, and impelling towards the shrubbery ; " the wind revives me, and your precepts are dear to my soul. Counsel on, my friend, and
atïd you shall see how I will cheat my mother toto comfort.** ** Disguise is a dangerous system," I observed ; ** yet tlie semblance may be followed by the reality : if ability was equal to inclination, I would indeed counseh as it is, I can only entreat." *' Be it entreaty—nay, call it what you will," said Angerville; " your words, amiablb Helena, sink deeper than all the erudite arguments of science. Oh yes ! for philosophy is cold, and a woutlded spirit like mine requires friendship to sooth it," '* Gratitude and friendship would alike sooth and heal every wound in your heart," I fervently exclaimed. " Holy saint*. !" and the tears of sensibility trem¬ bled in my eyes, " what would I not do for the preserver of De Beaufort? Shrink not from my thanks, generous, noble friend! but for you, my Eugenia had^ been an orphan," Absorbed by my own feelings, I mark- f 5 ed
ed not the features of Angerville; the sword of the gendarme aiming at the precious bosom of my love, filled my imagination, and, chased every vestige of colour from my cheeks. " De Beaufort should not have breath¬ ed an occurrence so trifling," said An¬ gerville thoughtfully ; " it was an effort he would have made for me." " Trifling !" I reproachfully repeated ; " do you call the life of my Eugenius trifling?" " No, not his life," replied Angerville, '* but my casual interference; it scarce merited thanks, much less remembrance." " Oh, „angerville !" I exclaimed, yield¬ ing to the enthusiasm of my feelings, and placing my spread hand upon my heart, " whilst I have breath—whilst I have memory, here will the remembrance live—here will De Beaufort and his pre¬ server be cherished !" Angerville. started—his cheek flushed, crimson, and then it feded tó the «oale * tint
tint of death: he gnawed his lip—he turned away his face ; I felt him tremble, and, without knowing why, I shrunk from his arm.—" What doyou fear, He¬ lena?" he interrogated, suddenly turn¬ ing, and gazing mournfully on me: " you revive remembrance, and then you are terrified at the emotions which those remembrances produce," " I am terrified, Angerville," I re¬ plied, " lest those emotions should un¬ dermine and destroy your health : is it not a natural terror, when we see the friend vve esteem resign himself up to dejection and despair?" " I will not despair," said Angerville energetically; " there is that within, vvhich tells me my case is not quite hope¬ less." " Heaven forbid Γ I ejaculated. " Ok no·, Angerville—success will crown the efforts of integrity,, and peace and hap¬ piness will be yours» Promise me to detach your thoughts from Eglissure— F 6 to
to banish'every local remembrance— tø exert the powers of reason ! 'Tis an in¬ justice to y ourself—to the world—to the Being who created you, to suffer your faculties to sink ihto inertness and sor¬ row, Think of your mother—think of her claims upon your affection—and for¬ titude and resolution will check an in¬ dulgence, which ultimately must weaken the powers of your mind, and subvert every principle you possess," " I do promise," ardently exclaimed Angerville ; " in the solitude of night, when the tempest gathers, and the rough winds howl, I will think of you, my geritle reprover, and hug your lessons in my heart." " You must do more," I rejoined : " Angerville, I must tax your friend¬ ship, your submission, further; promise me, in the hours destined for repose, no more to wander from your dwelling— no more to court danger in darkness and solitude." " Have
M Have you noted my night wander¬ ings? have you watched me from your window?" eagerly questioned «Anger- ville, and a deep crimson dyed his cheek, and a radiant ñre sparkled in his eyes; *' have you seen me, like a perturbed ghost, pausing, and musing, and gazing on heaven and earth, and w r ooing me¬ lancholy even to madness? Have you, Helena, retired with pity in your heart —have you sighed for the sorrows of Angerville?" " The eye of friendship is watchful," I exclaimed ; ** but the eye of maternal anxiety never slumbers. I have pitied the waywardness of your fortune, but it is your mother w T ho has marked your departure, and wept and prayed for your safety. She, with an emotion words cannot paint, has lamented the too-evi¬ dent change, and guessed and wondered at the hidden cause; she marks each sigh, she notes each look of sadness, she watches you with a scrutiny which de¬ fies
fies subterfuge. Angerville, in pity to ber affection, renounce your night wan¬ derings, and let her behold you as she liad wont, before your disastrous journey to Eglissure : and now let us return to the house—see, my Eugenius awaits us at the door. Banish this cast of care, my friend, and* for your mother's peace, do strive to regulate your feelings." .Angerville spoke not A heavy cloud lowered on his brow—his eyes were bent upon the earth, as he moved mechani¬ cally forward. *' Am I to believe you a convert to my reasoning?" I softly asked. ** Believe ail you wish," said Anger¬ ville, mournfully, " only be wary of my secret" ** Would to Heaven," I exclaimed, a< you would permit me to reveal it to Eugenius! He esteems you, Anger- ville, and feelingly would he make al¬ lowance for the weakness of nature : he could not cast the stone, my friend," forcing
forcing a faint smile ; " besides* he——" . " Jiot for the universel" interrupting me with an energy which made me start: " breathe but the tale of degrada¬ tion, and you destroy roe-—lower me in the estimation of those whose esteem I \ alue, and you behold me no more í One word, one little word, and I snap every tie of nature-^-one word, and the ills which fall on this devoted head will crush it ! Helena, I am desperate—roy resolution fixed as fate. In a moment of unguarded folly I have opened roy heart—I liave revealed my sorrows; if you betray them to De Beaufort—if you raise but a doubt in his rpiiid—if I trace but the glance of suspicion from his eye, by the eternal God who created roe, the work of despair will be fatal! Pro¬ mise me, Heleiia-^-swear to roe by all you consider holy—swear by the sacred «lives of «De Beaufort and your child—swear, Helena, never to divulge the secret of my love! Swear-~swea r ..... " He
Ho spoke, he urged^with a vehemence which betrayed the anguish of his feel¬ ings. í* I do swear—I do promise, Anger¬ ville!" I whispered: "be satisfied—be composed ; unauthorized by you, the se¬ cret shall descend with me to the grave. I swear«—*-" and then I paused, for De Beaufort advanced to meet us. ^
CHAPTER IV.
Not one page in the archives of civilized nations transmits a day so black, so foul, so disastrous, so disgraceful to honour and to humanity, as the twenty-first of January 1793. It arose wet and gloomy —it lowered on a deed of sacrilege—it closed on the blood-sprinkled scaffold of a martyred king. * Not ari arrfr was tip- raised to aid or to rescue—not a voice to
to denounce on the regicides the thun¬ der of Heaven's wrath! Stupor and consternation paralyzed the citizens of Paris; and those whose hearts eould feel, felt in inaction» The measure of crime was full—the deed of horror was accom¬ plished ! Powerless in all but evil, thou¬ sands witnessed the awful, the soul-har¬ rowing spectacle; yet did no burst of indignation, no lingering spark of loy¬ alty, proclaim the wish to save or perish in the cause. Full of humility, faith, and meekness —pardoning his enemies—praying for his misguided subjects—relying impli¬ citly on the mercy of his Saviour—St, Louis bent his head to the block, giving to after ages a bright example of for¬ titude, resignation, and true piety, dying as he had lived, in gentleness and virtue: he fell a mournful victim to the turbu¬ lence of faction, and to that fatal want of exertion and vigour which, crushing treason
treason in its birth, is the firmest and surest prop of a throne. Too often does lenity prove mistaken mercy—-too often is clemency rewarded by ingratitude and aggression! With promptitude and decision, ever should the first embers of sedition be extin* guished, lest, bursting into a flame, it lay waste every social duty, fanning the passions of men into frenzy, and wan¬ tonly violating all that humanity would hold sacred, or justice guard. - Oh ! what a season of trial and torture was it for those who in distance could only feel and weep the dishonour of their country—who, torn from inheritance, banished in the general wreck, savv all their boast, their pride, and their glory, humbled to the dust ! " The hour is come," exclaimed De Beaufort, " when I blush in the name of Frenchman—when, burying my de¬ graded head» I execrate the land of my nativitv.
nativity, and steel my heart against all her penalties and all her woes. Father of the universe \ hast thou no thunder- hast thou no vial of wrath, to pour upon the heads of those who have levelled thy altars and murdered thy vicegerent up¬ on earth ?" Angerville too was rapt in abstraction and horror : not an individual sorrow was thonght of—not a care broke on tlie aw¬ ful pause vvhich seemed to follow this political crash. The minds of men were absorbed—the social worid astounded— violence and disorder had arrived at its very acme—probability was outraged, for all that the wildest imagination could have pictured possible was now realized; a monarchy which, under three dynasties, for nearly fifteen centuries had existed, overthrown and destroyed! Louis the Desired, the late worshipped sovereign of a loyal people, dethroned—branded with obloquy—stripped ofthe privileges of
of a king—denied the common rights whieh the law had given tlie meanest of his subjects—dragged like a malefactor to the scaffold—his appeal drowned by the drum's incessant din—his head bru¬ tally held up to the public gaze*—his sa¬ cred dust hurried into the grave, with¬ out stone or relic—the very spot levelled, that no foot which wandered o'er it should pause in reverence—no heart, at¬ tracted by local feeling, should there drop a tear to his memory and his misfor¬ tunes ! The whole Continent too was in com¬ motion : every crowned head, every ti¬ tled ruler, threatened! disorganizing principles rapidly promulgated—princi¬ ples insidious and dangerous, calculated to fan the hopes of spirits dark and dar¬ ing—to mislead and poison the unin¬ formed mind—to convert the active citi¬ zen into his country's deadly foe! fra¬ ternity and assistance held forth to the disaffected
disaffected of every nation, and loud and declamatory declarations of hostility against each existing government ! " What is life?" articulated De Beau¬ fort, turning his eyes in horror from the printed record of violence and guilt; " I am sick of life ! Who shall escape cala¬ mity and outrage, when blood so sacred flows—vvhen crimes so flagitious stain and defile humanity ? who shall depend upon a brilliant sun, when a being, seem¬ ingly beyond the reach and pressure of afllicticn. is thus traduced, thus outraged, thus destroyed?" I gazed anxiously at him—I read the struggling war of passions; my lips trembled, but I did not speak. " You have much, very much to live for," murmured Angerville; " fate hoi'*-. forth a world of promise, rich in joy, in hope." He paused—then lowering his voice to a whisper—■" 'Tis I wdio have nothing left." " All—all is lost !" pursued De Beau¬ fort,
fort, dead to every thing save his own reflections: " king—honour—country 1 Exiled, m beggary and wretehedriess; the chain of hfe is galling ; yet roust we drag it hence, and flying to other realms, teach our proud hearts no more to vi¬ brate to the chord of hirth and patriot¬ ism. Holy saints ! how are the visions of hope blasted—how is every expecta¬ tion sunk! Not one arm to rescue— not one voice to execrate the foul, the sacrilegious murder ? Wretched, wretch¬ ed country ! fallen, degraded Francé ! Oh that I had died ere thy dishonour had been accomplished—ere such a day had dawned !" Alarmed, terrified at his tone of de¬ spondency, at his look of woe, I sprung frorn my seat, and throwing myself upon his bosom— w Yes, we will fly, we will journey to other realms," I exclaimed : " Eugenius, you are not dishonoured— you are not debased; rich in friends, rich in a heart which beats but for you, what
what of difficulty can we not surmount? what of privation can we not endure? Oh ! let not this fatal blow destroy your fortitude î however dark the present, tiie future yet may brighten." " Never !" pronounced De Beaufort ; " a blot in the escutcheon ofa nation, as in a character, is not to be effaced : time cannot tear out the leaf which transmits a crime so damning." " Let us go beyond the reach of these. fearful stories," I resumed, vainly striv¬ ing to cheer and to sooth him ; " let us go to England, that asylum of peace— that land of philanthropy, in which the destitute ne'er seeks in vain for succour; there, secure from the storms which wreck the political world, w r e may for¬ get all public wrongs, or rather, banish¬ ing them as a hateful dream, seek for peace in the calm smooth current of do¬ mestic life." * " Peace!" mournfully repeated Do Beaufort: "peace is not for roe J the. hearts
«Ш - - Itearts of sil hf$à Frenchmen have bid adieus peaße^ χ Ί ^ *- ντ - "> - &?Wlty 'flyi-*why desert our, post?" asked Angerville, who with folded arms had stood apparently lost in abstraction : " rather let us stay, and in the struggle foreur rights,? expend the laste drop of our blood. Firm in the cause of huma¬ nity and honour, ЫЬ us hail a deadlyfee in every arm which wields the sword of republicanism*-even against the land which gave us birth, let us swear enmity and· mortal bate." -вке thesun ernerging from the black ■bosom of the storm, the cheek of Euge- idu&flushed a deeper tint as hk eyes sparkled with the rekindled fire of en¬ thusiasm—" Yes," he exclaimed, raising lus clasped hands to -heaven» ^'*we will embalm in^eir bloodthe memoiy ofthe sainted Louis! We will^pweve^do swear enmity and mortal hate Jo the rank re- pmblic of f!raneei*»*to all 4he wretehed royjfmidons of regicides aiul traitors! Forgetful
Forgetftil of* every thing save revenge and glory, we wúl return to our post, and right as men who have nought to lose but Hfe." Every word fell like burning lead up¬ on my brain—the decree of fate herself could not have been more quick, more appalling; roy heart's blood seemed to congeal within roe; and though roy senses did not forsake roe, stiff and sta¬ tue-like I sunk at Ms feet. I felt the almost maddened pre-.mv of his em¬ brace-—I lieard his self^reproachei^-J saw his tears^-they fell upon my cold cheek as it lay upon his bosom, and yet I could not make one single effort—I could not pronounce one single word: panting, gafsping, I pointed to the window; I felt to pine for air, as though that, and that alone, could prevent suffocation. Angerville, watching every move¬ ment, snatched me from the arms of tlie trembling De Beaufort, and though the hoar-frost of winter hung on every spray, Vol. п. G he
'l^sırpported roe into the /gardens The МЫ' Weak wind farmed roe into life; tííttgserly I inhaled it—eagerly I* tumed to tare the sullen blast, for it seemed to •emé roy throbbing temples, to cool ¿the hurning fire in my brain«. *' benight was rayless, no star elione tin the heavens, and the sullen roar of rfhe perturbed waters was all that the ear -could catch of sound. Eugenius was at 'røy sideband yet I could not withdraw ►myselffrom the arms of Angerville; I fek him tremble as he held roe—I heard hirri sigh as he bent over me, but I sus- îpeeted not the source of agitation—Iques- 4ioried not the colouring of pretended « friendship: alas! how should I? I had thought, I had heart, I had pereeptionybut for DeBeaufort; he had awakened the en- thufciastn of feeling— hé had concentrated eVfciy thought in one, for so completely was ï snared iu f the magictoil of love, that to all, save in which lie lookedi*and and moved, and spoke, I was insensible. • : The
Tlie remonstrances of the kind-heart¬ ed madame Angerville recalled us to the parlour; she would have led roe to roy own chamber, and by mild and gentle argument have softened roe to tears, but I resisted all her endeavours—war, blood¬ shed, and peril, was all that pressed up¬ on my imagination, and clinging to De Beaufort, I besought him not to desert, but to take me witli him.— w Judge me not by the paleness of my cheek, by, tlie tremour of my hands," I emphatically exclaimed ; " danger will not deter-~eo#r rage will not forsake me : 'tis in the \ш\\г of privation and distress that I claim a right to suffer with you. Fear not to trust me, Eugenius —the energies of my mind will not fail ; leave me not here a prey to suspense and wretchedness: oh! take me with you, that the che¬ quered path of misfortune may be cl|eer- ed vvith the warm ray of affection and sympathy." " Helena, my gentle Jove, yop know g 2 not
not what you'feâk. Oîï, heK»eve me, in the Iiour of endurance and difficulty, to know you in safety has been my only consolation.*' " Alas! I havefound no*consolation," I eageriy resumed. " Oe Beaufort, ,we raust not part; it is not in the bright sunshine of prosperity, it is when the adverse clouds of peril and misfortune lower, that I claim to be With you. Should you fall—should you be wounded— should you need the gentle solace of af¬ fection, whose bosom can uphold you ? who in distance can occupy my place?" The recollection of Hyacinthe arose, and the icy shudder which accompanied it filled them with apprehension for my safety. ** Retire, my love," implored De Beau¬ fort ; " another time, another season, we wffl resume the subject: he composed, he persuadad— abs! these conflicts en¬ dangers life a thousand tiroes more pre- eteus than my own." " Not
" Not till you have granted my prayer," I eagerly replied, sinking on my knees before him. " Eugenius, you have rived my heart—drop then a balm upon iU sorrows: only let me be the faithful partner of your hardslups—let me follow the same track of peril; for, connected with your destiny, there is no prospect which can have terrors for me." " Dear, cruel friend of my heart !" murmured De Beaufort, attempting to raise roe, " if you knew the pangs you in¬ flict—if you could read the anguish of my bosom, surely in mercy you would spare me.—Aid roe, Angerville," turning to his friend, " you who know so well the scenes we are about to visit, speak, and strengthen vvhat I have scarcely courage to pronounce." AngerviUe raised his head from the chairback against which it rested; he turned towards us, and betrayed a coun¬ tenance paie* and nearly convulsed with the agitation of his mind.—" No, no," g 3 ' ' he
he faltered, starting as though from ab¬ straction, " Helena, your Helena, must not visit a camp—must not quit Sebaf¬ hausen. In times like these, the vicis¬ situdes of a soldier's fortune are too des¬ perate for beauty and innocence to com¬ bat ; Helena must stay with my mother —must share the sanctuary cruel fate has left us." ' ■ " Never-—never !" interrupting hiro ; " I will be the companion of De Beau¬ fort—I vvill share his fortunes and his dangers. Angerville, dissuade me not; you know not of what the female heart is capable when spurred by affection such as mine. Again in disguise I am con¬ tent to w r ander; but deprived of De Beaufort, I will not rest." Angerville breathed a shuddering sigh —Eugenius too bent his head upon his breast, to hide the tears whicli streamed down his cheeks ; whilst I, exulting in my imisgined conquest raised my eyes •in gratitude to heaven. Ah!
Ah ! how in one f little rooment did ihe voice of madame Angervilte relax the high-wrought perve.of heroism, attd awaken. ì »every рцке -of nature iii my heart! how.did she.poise the,balance,' and» call me back, to reason and convic¬ tion I A.silent observer of all which had passed,, approving the arguments óf Dé Beaufort and her son, yet willing to con¬ vince roe by'more than words, she had stolen unperceived from the chamber,- and returned, bearing a powerful auxili*> ary in her arms.—" Poor child !" slie ar¬ ticulated, caressing tlie little Eugenia,' " deserted by tliy natural protector,, who will be- a mother to thee ? Ϋ , * Electric was tlie claim! the heroine died—the« mother alone existed. «I sprung towards her, and snatching her to my bosom,.- burst into a passion of tears. *"But for this precious charge, you might journey with your husband,'' con¬ tinued madame Angerville, regardless g 4 of
©f my emotion; "alone, unincumbered, you might tempt every danger—you might brave every privation ; but to take her with you would be exposing her helplessness to certain destruction— to leave her, a violation cf nature's boimden duty. Remember, roy young friend," taking roy hand, and struggling to suppress the sympathetic tenderness of her own heart, " we are placed in this world for the benefit and happiness of others, not for the gratification of our own feelings: sometimes the track of duty is toilsome; but however rough and thorny tlie path, rest assured its sa¬ cred and conscientious fulfilment will ensure a balm which the world cannot take away, or time efface. I have been a happy wife ; in early youth I was wi¬ dowed, and the welfare of roy boy was the only spur which roused me from my trance of sorrow«. I beheld hini, and I felt no longer desolate—he claimed my exertion, and I struggled against the load
load of grief vvhich had nearly crushed me. Think how dissimilar are our trials : you part with be Beaufort for a sea¬ son—I parted vvith Angerville for ever ! You may teach your cherub to lisp the name of father—to pray for his safety— to anticipate his return; I, alas! was compelled to check inquiries which wrung my heart—to await with patient woe until time had expunged from his infant mind all trace of the author of his being. Think—think of the compara¬ tive bliss, and learn to be submissive— learn to be grateful," I turned intuitively towards her—her countenance was irradiated-—her whole soul spoke in her eyes.—" The cause of outraged humanity calls for the aid of every loyal Frenchman," she feelingly continued: " the flaming scourge of re¬ volutionary frenzy sears the land, de¬ nouncing laws, both human and divine ! Were I a man, my arm should wield the sword—as it is, I have an onlv son, g δ and
and him I offer to the cause of honour." De Beaufort fixed his eyes upon me —he seemed to await my answer, as thougii it teemed vvith fate.—" Speak, Helena," he implored ; " will you not tarry in this peaceful sanctuary? vvill you not strive to emulate the example of our heroic friend ?" '* I will be all you wish," I faintly murmured ; " bear with шу weakness. und I vvill strive to stem the trials ne¬ cessity imposes." But though I tried to smile at the grateful euloiriums of Eugenius, mv heart felt sad within me ; a heavy cloud lowered on my prospects, and I shrunk in spirits as though from a gathering storm. In vain I strove to dissipate the gloom, lo woo returning cheerfulness—a fatal presage mocked each effort, and for whole days I woke to think, arid slept to dream of desolation, war, and blood¬ shed. Alas! how tenderly, how dili¬ gently did madame Angerville study to •-oot h
; sooth and to uphold me—how did she ring the word duty in my cars, and whisper peace in its fulfilment ! She read not the guilty heart of the wretch she harbourCjd — she guessed not that the* first duty of nature had been outraged —thut I had deceived my father—aban¬ doned my home—sacrificed even virtue to passio*!. Just God ! how could I hear of duty, and not own iny apostacy ? how could I raise my eyes to her face, and not die vvith the heavy consciousness of sin and shame? The worm of remorse was not awakened — the hour of attrition had not dawned;, my tears flovved at the pressure of local sorrow—not to expunge the festering stains of guilt No,·, no, I was no penitent then—I was no sup¬ pliant for mercy and forgiveness. Rich in the love of my betrayer, it was his safety for vvhich I» prayed—it was his presence which inspired roe with glad¬ ness : I pictured not a father's anguish— go I recalled-
I recalled not a fatheťs curse ; if in the solitude of night it rose to moek me, I clung to Eugenius, and chased away the phantom. Oh ! what a trance of mental nn waa there! what a store for future woe and future penance ! Young and thought¬ less, and secure in roy own strength, I dreamt not of this cell and this sack¬ cloth ; strange, eventful, chequered, are the scenes of life—beset with vicissitudes, ensnared with temptations ! How blessed are those, who steering calmly down the stream, sink in repose and honour ! who revising the past without bitterness, deck the future in glorious hope! Within these hallowed walls, beneath this holy roof, I too might have glided down the stream unmarked, unpolluted—I might have been chaste, and wise, and happy —I might have curbed all the wild flights of fancy, and Kved and died with heaven in roy heart—I might have trod in the pure calm steps of ihe sisters of Santa
Santa Maria di Tindâro, and hent niv knee at the consecrated altar of ròy wor¬ ship ! l Oh, De Beaufort ! dear, cruel enemy of my soiďs repose ! but for thee, I hád transgressed no law—I had violated no duty ! I had lived in innocence—-I had dropped into the grave in peace! De Beaufort ! De Beaufort * but for thee— Whither am I wandering? My brain is dizzy, and my temples throb. For¬ give me, wan shade of my love f forgive the wild reproaches of an almost-niad* dened spirit! De Beaufort, my De Beaufort, thy memory is embalmed itt my heart's core!—I hate mourned theé till reason and reBgion failed ! In life thou wert more precious than honour— in death thou hast clouded every ray of earthly hope ! Frown not in anger ; my lips have reproached thee, but not my heart ! It was destiny Which dyed my path in blood : thou wert the surl Which invigorated and eheered me— thdtí Wert all
all that nature ever gave me-of bliss and joy—thou wert my world—beyond thee life owiied no temptation ! No, no, De Beaufort, it is destiny whicli crushes the flower; the storm blows over it, and the leaves wither—the hurricane descends, and bows its tender head to the dust 1 Heed not reproach ;, it is- destiny vvhich digs the grave—destiny whicli breaks the heart, and rives the hopes of pro¬ mise! Even from the Gratile, mist and gloom enveloped me ; my father reared me in disguise—my mother forsook me when I needed all her tenderness.. Oh yes ! from the earliest dawn of recollec¬ tion, I was the predestined child of* au lamity—the victim of credulity and feel* ing! Shade of my love ! frown not in anger —let me see thee smile—let me behold thee but once^—kt me hear thee bless me, and the weight on roy »brain vvill be lightened. «De Beaufort, my De Beaufort, what is distance—what axe walls
walls and bolts to a spirit relieved of its mortal coil ? Here on my knees do I supplicate thee ! Come, come, De Beau¬ fort, hover over me !—sooth me as thou wert wont!—smile upon me—tell me we shall meet hereafter—teach me forti¬ tude, teach me resignation! Oh, if you could excite my tears—if you could but cut the string which presses on my heart! Come, and speak to me of my child; tell mew T here they have laid her? Do rhe spring-flowers blossom on her grave? do the dews of heaven weep upon the turf? God, God bless the hand vvhich plucks away the weeds ! it should be a mother's hand; but I have sought long, and I cannot find it. Come, come and guide me, De Beaufort—the sisters ;n*e all sleeping—the dormitory still as the grave. Shade of my love, descend ! only smile on me once, and despair and çrief will vanish ! Alas ! Τ scarce know vvhat I have writ* ten:
ten: I believe the fever is returning; a burning coal lies in my brain, and De Beaufort comes not to cool it. Strange images of death and horror encompass me: mv ideas are confused—I cannot *· forget, and yet I cannot mould my re¬ collection. Perhaps I have written too much tc-night; I have thrice tumed the hour-glass, and again is its last sand mn. My nerves are stretched beyond their strength : I am not mad, but very, very weak. I go then first to prayer, and then to seek rest untu to-morrow
CHAPTER V. Тнй£ depression of Angerville still con · tinuing, amounted to a height beyond the possibility of disguise; his naturally pale cheek grew paler—his eyes bent be¬ neath the slightest scrutiny—and fre¬ quently would the too visible hurry on his
his nerves and spirits baffle aH his strug¬ gles; then he would start, and, «flying from the society of his friends, bury him¬ self in the solitude of his chamber, or wander in moody melancholy among the romantic passes of the surrounding coun¬ try, Sometimes at midnight he would bc .still absent—sometimes he would re¬ turn with a look so wild, a countenance so haggard, as to excite doubt almost for the sanity of his mind. If he saw care on the brow of his mother, he vvould force an appearance of cheerfulness—if De Beaufort, in the warm zeal of friend¬ ship, questioned the source of inquietude, he vvould speak of the martyred Louis, and descant on the desolation of his country.—" Can the smile be habitual," he would exclaim, " when the bosom is torn with a thousand conflicts ? Can the mask of cheerfulness be assumed* when the fiends of hatred and discord rage within? None but the eye of Heaven can read my heart, De ßeauforfc; seek not
not to decipher it: my thoughts are in¬ congruous—my flights and speculations scarcely known to myself: I am become a mere visionary—sometimes I feel as though my single arm could save the state—as though I could rush, and snatch from impending fate the beauteous heart- stricken relict of our murdered monarch. Urge me not; I cannot even mould thö wildness of my fancies: the scene of blood is ever before me—the vile rabble —the execrable San terre, deaf to the common pleadings of humanity, drown¬ ing in noise and tumult the last appeal to loyalty, sets my brain on fire, and makes me call for the anathema of Hea^ ven on the guilty race. Oh that I had died in infancy, on the bosom of my mother !—that my blood had flowed with the first blood which stained this dread¬ ful contest, or that I had swelled the list of slain in the wanton massacres* of thai second and third of September !" " .Angerväle," said JQe Beaufort, warm* h,
ly, " murmurs like these are an insult to reason; thousands, like ourselves, mourn the wreck of hope—the heritage of centuries! and yet must we submit to the lonely fate—to the rayless blank of our fortunes." " Your path lonely—your fate ray¬ less !" eagerly repeated Angerville. " De Beaufort, tempt not the vengeance of Heaven! Know you not, ingratitude is a heinous sin?" l)e Beaufort gazed upon the flushed countenance of his friend with doubtful wonder; he marked the wild struggles within, and sighed for woes he could not mitígate. " I would infer the blessing of a faith¬ ful friend," pursued Angerville, " and the lovely pledge she has given to your arms." " It is the fate of that sweet, that gen¬ tle friend, which casts a gloom on my spirits," thoughtfully observed Euge¬ nius. " Oh, Angerville, even at the moment
moment wlien her caresses ought to in¬ spire nought but büss, remorse whispers the. injuries I have done her. Should I fell, whete will she find a resting-place?" ** Whilst I live," solemnly pronounced Angerville, " your Helena need seek no Ьоше^ beyond this roof; my mother will be her mother,, and I will be the firm and tender guardian of your offspring. Alas ! our lots are not all alike prospe¬ rous ; my spring of love has been blight¬ ed, and friendship is the only flame which can thrive in roy bosom." The warm tide of gratitude from the heart rushed to the eyes of De Beaufort ; he would have snatched the hand of his friend—he would liave poured forth his feelings; but .Angerville, alike moved, shrunk from the confiict» and, rushmg from him, sought shelter in his own chamber. . . Alas ! how bund is?human foresight. how weak is human judgment! how da»k, how intricate фе designs, the ac¬ tiv с
tive policy of man ! Caught in tim toil, De Beaufort and myself praised the dis¬ interestedness of friendship, and grate¬ fully invoked the blessing of Heaven on the head of Angerville.— "Oh, De Beau¬ fort !" I exclaimed, yielding to the warm ardour of roy feefings, * what a friend do we possess! Should death remove us from the world, our Eugenia will-not want a protector !" " Enthusiastic, warm in his senti¬ ments," said De Beaufort, chasing the tear of gratitude which trembled in his eye, " he lives for the welfare and com¬ fort of others ; burying in his own bosom the secret thorn of woe, he fears to tax friendship, even with the pang of sympa¬ thy ! Exemplary, generous Angerville! may fortune yet smile on thy path, and felicity gild thee with her brightest sun¬ shine ! May every cloud of care be dis¬ sipated, and joy and prosperity, great as are thy virtues, crown thee !" " Amen ! amen i" I 'e wently aspirated; and
and at that moment, the imagined worth ^>f Angerville was almost hallowed. I longed to breathe the tale of sufferance, but I dared not infringe my promise: I longed to extol the heroic struggles of integrity, to proclaim his conquest over $elf-+· but the violation of my word to him seemed sacrilege. Days of care and gloom succeeded ; thoughtful, sad, we had not awakened from the almost-annihilating blow vvhich the murder of the king had inflicted— scarce had our scared senses recovered the trance of astonishment and horror— scarce had we analyzed the fearful, the appalling feelings of our own hearts. .All Europe joined in the burst of indig¬ nation—every civilized realm execrated a barbarity, which the unlettered Indian -could not have practised. * In that deed, the glory of France was set, and all the prowess of her former splendours, all the achievements of her mighty darings, obscured by that damn¬ ing
ing blot in her archives. Who could «read of the magnanimity of her ancient heroes, and not mourn die degeneracy of her race ? Who could dive into the bright page of her history, and not curse the hands which had shrouded the pre¬ sent era in a veil of blood ? We could speak but of the regicides—but of the mock trial and persevering virulence of party—of the king's appeal to the people —of the injustice, the inhumanity of the convention—of the last efforts of the ve¬ nerable Malesherbes —ofthe painful, the agonizing scene of dissolution. To the new system of philosophy vve ascribed the vast catalogue of ills—to the fatal seeds which the pen of genius liad »disseminated, and whicii, ripening in the corrupt hearts of men, had sapped and destroyed tiie fundamental basis of order.—" It is a curse, a deep-rooted eurse upon the civilized world," said ma¬ dame Angerville, " when man ceases to «be humble, whçn he ceases to be grate¬ ful
ftrl for the mercies of the Supreme— when, proud in his own conceit, he dares to cavil and rebel í Tis then the scourge is let loose, and his own guilty passions kmdle the flame whieh consumes him. Fatal are the powers which involve in doubt and scepticism; pernicious, dan¬ gerous the researches which seek in cold system to organize the mysteries of na¬ ture. Better to be born, better to pass through life in innocence and ignorance, than to dazzle with erudition, and mis¬ lead by false and mistaken deductions ! Intoxicated by the brilliancy of genius, vve behold rt as a comet in the horizon ; led bv the track of its effulgence, as the eye of astronomy essays to trace its source, its end, and the nature of its being, so does the physical worM listen, gaze, and hnbŕbe the speculations of science, by tums confounding or converting to its Irypothesis. Who then would wish to be so marked?—>who would sigh for the talent which entails such a weighty re¬ quisition ?
quisition ? As Marcus Aurelius say¿*-* * It is not in our power to be a natura« list, a poet, an orator, a mathematician, but it is in our power to be virtuous, and that is best of all." But to return to my memoir:—The gloomy abstraction of Angerville admit¬ ted but of little variation : intent upon some hidden piirpose, he heeded not the remonstrances of friendship; the same cloud of care shrouded his brow, and his frequent start betrayed the busy workings of imagination. Though the morning rose dark and heavy—though the snow continued to fall, and the earth was deep clad in its cold and comfortless livery, under the plea of visiting Sclmf- hausen, Angerville absented himself from our circle. The åay wore away, and he eame not; a ** night of storm" set in, and ere suspense amounted, to agony, a letter was pat into the hands of his mo¬ ther. ** Be under no apprehension for my safety," he wrote;** I shall not .re- VOL. JL H tlim
turn for some days«; my destination is Uncertain. Call me, if you will, myste¬ rious and enigmatica! ; I have embarked hi л new project, and am intent on schemes and plottings. Rest in peace, my excellent mother; and tell De Beau¬ fort he vvill see me long before^ the day destined for a return to our post" Ah, that day ! was it a dire forebod¬ ing of evil which chased the life's blood from my cheek, as I perused even so ¿light a mention of that day of woe ? It came, and happiness was wrested from me ! Happiness------oh, did I ever par- fake of happiness? Could the feverish dream of love be called happiness ? Yes, yes—when I pressed my child to my throbbing bosom, rapture and joy w r ere mine! That chiki—why did I leave that precious pledge? Does she yet live ? am I indeed a mother ? Years have worn away—long and lin¬ gering years, and still suspense, and dark and cheerless mystery, hang on the fate of
of my child. 1 have mourned her loss till reason tottered—I have wept till every tear has been exhausted. Oh, I have yielded to grief—I have prayed to die *of grief; but grief does not kill ! Often have I felt a fever at my heart, a tightness on my breath, which seemed for the moment to promise what I co¬ veted: but strength, and youth, and na¬ ture were against me; and a long, a dreary track of existence was I doomed to tread. # «κ φ φ *φ φ Whole hours have elapsed since I traced the last lines: I tried to proceed, but I could not—roy fingers vvere stift' and cold—my brain frenzied with recol¬ lection : flames of fire seemed to encom¬ pass me, and seas of blood to float on every sida Again do I collect my scat tered senses—again do I return to that period in my ill-starred story, which closed in the letter of Angerville. Vain and fruitless conjectures occupied w ^ the
the minds ef madame Angerville and De Beaufort; I ventured not one obser¬ vation, for the weakness of my own heart told me lie was gone to Eglissure, —" Ah," thought I, " Angerville, thou hast deceived thyself and me ! thou hast struggled for freedom, but passion has got the mastery: regardless of every sacred tie—spurning at honour and at duty, thou art gone to sigh at the feet of thy mistress—perhaps to overthrow the flimsy barrier of virtue. Alas ! alas ! vvhat vvill a heart like thine sustain, when the delirium is passed—»when rea¬ son regains her power—when honour mourns her momentary slumber ! Un¬ happy friend, what years of remorse art thou storing up—what deep, what irre¬ mediable anguish art thou heaping on thy conscience! Who so well can tell the heavy penalty of crime and disobe¬ dience? Heaven knows, I sought to warn thee—but my counsels and my prayers were alike unheeded," At
At night, when I pressed my»■ pillow, when De Beaufort slumbered at my side, I mourned the destiny of Anger¬ ville, as a sister vvould have mourned a. brother; I recalled all that he had told me—all the fancied struggles ofhis noble nature; and even when I slept, it was to dream of the siren who beguiled his peace. Transported to the flowery meads of Eglissure, I heard the love-fraught tale of passion ; I saw Angerville kneel¬ ing at the feet of beauty : I would have spoken, but he rose, deformed and gi¬ gantic, to my view—a mask seemed to fall from his visage, and around him coiled the snakes of envy and malevo¬ lence. I shrunk from him—I fled, and instantly, the scene shifting, the emerald hills of my native Sicily rose to my view; the lovely vale of the Piano di Brolo — the embosomed cottage of my father— all smiled, all courted, but my heart was sad : I seemed to stand on the banks of the San Angelo —I seemed to feel like η 3 one
one who seeks a haven, escaped the wrecks of storm and tempest.—Pale; shadowy, roy father rose to view; I extended my arms, but he spurned me : quickly passing from life to death, he lay a bleeding corse at my feet I had stumbled — I had nearly fallen over him, when the hand of the holy Christian upheld me.—" Mourning, and sorrow, and woe, await thy return, oh daughter of frailty !" he solemnly pro¬ nounced; " anguish, and remorse, and misery, cloud every revolving year of thy sublunary pilgrimage !" I tried to speak, but I could not—I tried to shriek, but power and voice were fled ; and such was the agony of the moment, that, vvhen I awoke, the bed felt to shake under me—large drops of perspiration hung upon my forehead, and all the endeavours of Eugenius fail¬ ed in restoring tranquillity ; a flood of tears was my only relief; and carefully did I watch the long night through, lest sleeping,
sleeping, I should relapse into horrors. The houifs of infancy were revised ; the first dawning flights of memory—the sad tale of my mother-—the introduction of one De Beaufort—the fatal sojourn¬ ment of the other; and then followed the curse of my father, resting like a blight, a mildew on me and mine—it blasted every promise life could offer— it pointed even beyond the verge of this world's hopes—" Oil, must it descend from generation to generation? My child—my Eugenia!" and I buried my face in the pillow, for my sobs were suf¬ focating. In the morning, my spirits drooped— my cheeks vvere pale, and my eyes red vvith weeping: I was not superstitious-, yet this dream appeared prophetic; it filled me with terror, and wherever I turned, the faded image of my father, such as in the night I had seen him, rose to fancy. Alas ! I could thiuk no more ofthe bloody struggles of Marty—I could H 4 dwell
dwell no more on the fate of empires and of kings—my own woes monopo¬ lized every tear, and the dread of com¬ ing eyil doomed each rising thought to sadness. The mild and gentle persuasions, aided by the firm arguments of De Beaufort, restored roe to something like rationa¬ lity : he spoke of dreams, as a fever of the bram— as the ghost of our waking thoughts—as the sickening jaundice of harassed spirits—as wild and shapeless inconsistencies, which ought to be for¬ gotten as soon as formed.—" We live not in an age for signs, and visions, and auguries !" he exclaimed ; " the sun of reason, dissipating the fogs of supersti¬ tion, the mind of man emerges from fa¬ naticism and ignorance." I struggled for self-exertion—I tried to banish remembrance—I forced the smile of apparent ease ; and in fondling iny little Eugenia, almost thought my¬ self happy: tlu 1 intuitive tenderness of De
De Beaufort paid me for the effort, and in his love I forgot contrition and re¬ pentance. A whole week passed, and Angerville came not: conjecture was worn out, and De Beaufort commenced alone the me¬ lancholy preparations for his return to the army.—" Fear not, my Helena," he would exclaim, kissing away the tears which dimmed my eyes; " I go but for a season ; your prayers will be my shield : and when next I revisit this haven of my hopes, be this campaign conclusive or not, honour will require no further sacrifice. Yes—should the dream of courage yield to necessity, and to the false bias of power, we will try to banish public wrongs, and seek for bliss in our own domestic circle." " Would to Heaven the hour was come !" I sobbed—*" w T ould to Heaven, honour no more enjoined a tax so heavy ! Yes, my Eugenius, joyfully w r ould I и ő shrink
shrink with thee into obscurity, nor envy a prince the splendour of his lot" This promise^—this faint beam of fu¬ ture felicity 7 , revived the drooping springs of hope. Alas! in early youth, how buoyant are the spirits—how little strung to cope with disappointment and with woe! tinting with fairy rays the pros¬ pects of futurity, expectation chases the tear, and trains the mind to bliss ! Then I guessed not the sad, sad task, since so severely inflieted: spite of all that I had felt, happiness appeared,not visionary; »or did I dream, that, like the ignis- /atuus, it woos, and flies the reach oí man. Submitting to what appeared inevit¬ able, the weeks, almost the days of De Beaufort's absence were arranged : in my mental musings, I resolved to devote the painful blank of separation to the en¬ dearing charge of our child, and in fer¬ vent supplications to the Throne of Grace,
Grace, for the health and safety of her dearer father. Religion appeared to my saddened feelings the only firm staff of rebanee; and even I r who had violated its sacred ordinations, and trampled on its first laws, dared recall, and dwell on tiie early lessons I had gleaned in the hermitage of father Christian. " I will teach the lips of innocence," I exclaimed, " to breathe the same aspirations ! I will raise her little hands in mine, and, through a spotless Mediator, appeal to the God of all good. Yes, my child,, thou shalt be my cherub of comfort, for to thy prayers alone can I look for mercy. Oh, may the sword be blunt ere it fall on the head of" De Beaufort!—may the doto^ nating ball of mischief burst ere it reach him Í" The strange absence of Angerville was a heavy addition to my weight of care : he had twice saved the life so precious to me, and ln> arm appeared to my jaundiced imagination like a shield of H 6 strength.
strength. In his active vigilance I could * have trusted ; to hiro I eould have poured forth the timid cautions of affection, and received, in his promises, surety and comfort. Hurried aw r ay by headstrong passion, he perhaps might never return ; and with feelings of acute sympathy, I joined in the regrets and anxieties of his mother. Again and again did we peruse the epistle—and again and again did the day dawn and close in the same suspense. De Beaufort smiled at our fears, even when his own bosom harboured inquie¬ tude : he fancied a thousand causes, with¬ out once hinting his doubts of rashness having hurried his friend into danger : the nature of the times gave scope for the wildest apprehensions, and vague and fruitless conjectures were encouraged and relinquished by tums. From the strength and fervour of An- g»Tville*s smothered passion, fear crowd¬ ed upon fear ; and yielding to the strange bias of incertitude, whieh ever chugs to the
the worst, I pictured him acting as the father of De-Beaufort had acted—snap¬ ping the bonds of wedded love, and stealing a matron from the bosom of in¬ nocence and honour. The coincidence was painful, but though the conclusion stung me, it was too probable to be re* nounced. I had seen him in moments when the jarring conflict of feeling seem¬ ed ripe for desperation—-when reason and honour were as chaff before the wind- when every holy tie yielded to the fren¬ zy of passion—when the denouncements of retributive wrath were scoffed at and despised. How could I recall him at the moment, when, tottering on the dizzy rock which overhung the Rhine, he seemed ready to plunge into its waters, without trembling for the fearful solu¬ tion wliich every day I expected would burst like thunder upon us? The dread¬ ed extent of awakened remorse filled me too with horror; and often did I gaze on
on madame Angerville with eyes which, if they spoke my feelings, denoted- nought but pity. It was in the morning of the eighth· day of Angorville's absence from Schaf hausen, as I stood at the window, mark¬ ing the askaunt rays of a winter's sun sparkling on the waste of snow, and listening to the sweet notes of a robin* which had perched on the leafless spray, and seemed to hail the momentary reno¬ vation of nature, that the reverberating sound of a horse's hoofs, bounding e'er the frozen road,, rivetted my attention. I bent forward—I strained my eyes in search of the horseman—I knew not why, but my heart palpitated, and my cheeks burnt with the glow of expecta¬ tion. Swift, as though on the wings of the wind,« the stranger advanced ; he cleared every brake and barrier·.—he entered the little paddock ; his face was turned towards the chateau, and though muffled
muffled in a large coat, and his hat flap¬ ping over his eyes, I soon recognized the well-known features of Angerville. Elated with pleasure, and pining to be the harbinger of glad tidings, I vvould have flown to the ehamber of his mo¬ ther; but my passage was barred, for Angerville, almost breathless vvith speed, met me in the hall He snatched my hand vvith transport, nor did I shrink from the embrace, or hesitate, though in* the absence of De Beaufort and his mo¬ ther, to permit his salute. Heaven knows* my thoughts vvere as calm as vestal pu¬ rity ; nor did the evident perturbation of Angerville awaken one single doubt : oh ло ! I hallowed his struggles as indica¬ tions of returning virtue, and welcomed the truant with a joy unmixed with bit- terne^s. I longed, yet feared to question ; and when in a voice of agitation he pro¬ nounced—" The sun shines on my re¬ limi to this dwelling of love," I fervent¬ ly
ly replied—" May it ever prove a dwell¬ ing of love to you !" His cheek was flushed, his gaze ar¬ dent,—" Know you vvhat you say, He¬ lena ?" he demanded ; " know you not the fatal barrier betwixt me and happi¬ ness ? The sun may smile on my path now, but soon, I fear me, vvill he set in clouds and darkness. Oh, my friend! oh, my kind monitress! you cannot dream what has passed here," pointing to his heart, " since last I saw you—» what passes here at this moment, for feeling is too wild to be analyzed ; think how imperative must be the necessity which saps and urges the overthrow of all the mind ere pie tured sacred! Does not the wretch merit some recompence who sacrifices every claim to one ?" He paused. " Alas! Angerville," I exclaimed, " what hidden meaning lurks beneath your words? You terrify me: why are you
you thus agitated? where have you been ? and what vvould you imply ?" " I dare not tell you, Helena," he con¬ tinued : ** I have been where life is held at nought, yet am I here in safety —nay, leave me not," seeing me ap¬ proach the door, " call not my mother, call not De Beaufort—I cannot meet them yet ; let me settle into something like sanity, and then for the trial." " Can the warm greetings of love and friendship be a trial?" I reproachfully asked. " Yes, Helena," shuddering, " every thing is a trial which meets me here : why, why did I brave it?" striking his hand against his forehead, and pacing the room with hasty strides. Suddenly pausing—" What will you say," he wildly continued, " if I tell you I am leagued vvith bloodhounds^—a spy—a murderer—denounced by God and man? what vvill you say, Helena? will you not hate—vvill you not curse me ?" The
The sudden paleness of my cheek ï believe recalled him to recollection, for when he saw me sinking powerless in a chair, every expression of wildness va¬ nished, and grief alone remained. " Forgive me, my angel friend !" he implored ; " I know not vvhat I say : since I quitted this dwelling, bitter have been my conflicts ; scarce have I knowm rest—scarce felt one hour's cessation from acute sufferance." " Then my fears are realized !" I arti¬ culated; "you have broken all there- solves of honour—-you have been to Eglissure ?" " No, on my soul !" eagerly exclaimed Angerville ; " I have not visited Eglis¬ sure, Probe me no further — I am wretched, inexpressibly wretched! I could a tale unfold —but why torture you with miseries beyond cure? why rive a heart by nature tender? why de¬ tail afflictions vvhich every day becoine more pungent ? The times are troubled*, my
my fair friend, and the gigantic strides of guilt almost defy the Almighty's power. Vain would w r e limit the enor¬ mities of man ! The barrier once passed, the guard of honour once slighted, and fiends and demons taking possession, trample on every lingering virtue. Oh ! you know not what he dares—you can¬ not dream the desperation passion urges." " Alas ! it is not passion," I observ¬ ed, regardless of all but public ills—" it is deliberate guilt, it is systematic in¬ trigue, and cold hearted villany, which now overthrow all that our progenitors considered sacred. Arc not our altars profaned, and the officiating servants of Heaven reviled and slaughtered?" " True," replied Angerville, thought¬ fully, " all this we see, and the thunder of wrath annihilates not the guilty land. The moralizcr vvould ascribe it to those restless and perturbed humours, vvhich, harboured in the breasts of men, like in¬ ternal fire, finding vent, explode, and spread
spread destruction ! The divine, to that Almighty Being, who, working in se¬ cret, produceth good even out of seem¬ ing evil : but go, Helena, now—1 feel I can meet my mother; breathe not a hint of dejection—not for worlds must she suspect my smiles are all assumed." Ah ! with what delight was the wan¬ derer welcomed ! how did the w r arm tear tremble in the eye of madame Anger¬ ville, as she pressed her beloved Charles to her bosom ! De Beaufort, too, with warm and genuine friendship, hailed his return ; even my little Eugenia smiled a recognition. Angerville, Angerville ! wert thou formed of human mould ? was there one grain of gratitude or mercy in thy composition ? But for thy mother, now, even now, would the curses of a heartbroken wretch fall upon thee.
С НАГ-
CHAPTER VI. It was past midnight, yet I was unable to sleep. The beams of a full moon chequering the chamber, threw a silver tissue on every object—now a gathering vapour scudded o'er her disk, and now again she emerged in all her brightness. —"' Such, such," I thought, " were the dreams of my childhood : I pictured the cloud transitory—the effulgence with¬ out alloy ; but soon, alas ! was the vision dissipated—soon did reality speak mis¬ fortune more than a passing shadow." The guilt of my mother, tlie woe of my father, were lessons not to be mis¬ construed; and yet had they failed in guarding my heart against a lure almost as destructive. I had chosen my own destiny; and the galling consciousness of
of disobedience was ever a weighty tax on my peace : the image of my father rose not alone in judgment against me— oh no ! ï had been an incentive to evil —my fatal beauty had been the bane to others' joy; and Hyacinthe, the meek suppliant for universal pardon, militated against every dawn of comfort. How could I picture happiness—how could I hope for happiness, with such a mon¬ strous catalogue against me ? how could I think I could err and be forgiven, and still cling to the dear and precious tempter ? Surely there are times when the hu¬ man mind lies under the dominion of some vile and propelling influence— when, dead to every genuine feeling, passion seizes fast the reins of action! Surely the demon of temptation, watch¬ ful of his prey, is, for some hidden end, permitted to sap the wavering heart— perhaps to humble the pride of mortal strength—perhaps to furnish the warn¬ ing of example. Ought I to curse the hei n 2
being who dissolved the spell ? No, An¬ gerville— rather ought I to bless thee, for it was thy hand which led to this cell of penance. All anger, all hatred, should cease to rankle^— I ought to pray for thee — I ought to pronounce thy pardon with my whole heart : but human nature is stubborn, and my lesson of humiliation not yet complete. Angerviile, may God forgive thee! yet—yet I cannot couple thy name in my blessings. All that I ever possessed of beauty is gone—tears have dimmed the lustre of my eyes—grief has chased tiie vivid røses from my cheeks—misery, iiud remorse, and watching, and priva¬ tion, worn my form to spectre thin- tiess ! Oh, daughter of dust ! mark the end of human vanity ! Spared the prey¬ ing mildew of sin, behold the work of quick revolving time ! Ф" "V ^> tf? ^t ^F As I lay wakeful on my pillow, watch¬ ing the chaste orb which glowed on high,
high, and musing on the return and strange agitation of Angerville, a light and cautious step in the passage made me start. It seemed to pause at the door of our chamber; and thougii I raised myself to listen, and though my heart beat with a quickened pulsation, I aw r akened not De Beaufort All con¬ tinuing still, I attributed it to the light coinage of fancy, and, smiling at my own fears, was again composing myself, when the same footsteps distinctly sound¬ ing, convinced me I did not dream : ere I had cast a loose wrapper round me, the sound had died away, and quick followed the grating of a bolt, and the careful opening of the hall-door. " Poor Angerville !" I sighed, softly stealing to the window, and the next in¬ stant I beheld him in his horseman's coat and flapped hat, stationed immedi¬ ately beneath it. I shrunk back, but the caution was unnecessary, for he seemed to be watehing the dark clouds as they floated
floated o'er the face of the moon, his own cheek looking as colourless as the beam which fell upon it. Dreadful at that period must have been the war in his soul ! Well might he steal from his bed, and wander like a restless spirit; honour was making the last stand, and passion claiming her so¬ vereignty. Holy saints ! why did I com¬ pound with my own misery ? why did I not awaken De Beaufort, and tell him all I had heard, and all I had witnessed ? Suspicion ought to have been excited : surely the warning voice had sounded, and the wary might have heard. Dead to the power of my own charms, I thought the heart of Angerville was at Kglissure, and not once—no, not for one single moment, did the idea waver. Unseen I watched him through the garden ; he bent his course towards the river ; nor until distance had closed him from my sight did I return, chilled and cold, to my pillow. Tormented by a yol. π. ι thousand
thousand inquietudes, I slept not until I lieard him re-enter his chamber; and even then my slumbers vvere broken, for my mind was busied in planning vague projects of remonstrance and appeal. The first meal of morning was silent and irioomv : the eves of madame An- gerville told mc she too had noted the night-wanderings of her son. Anger¬ ville appeared absorbed in his own re¬ flections, and De Beaufort, attributing all to approaching separation, caught the infection of sadness. He spoke of the successes of the republican arms, de¬ plored the blind infatuation of the mul¬ titude, and pictured the cause of the emigrant princes as nearly hopeless.— '* Court intrigues are against us," he con¬ tinued; "and the narrow chicanery of power a bar to all our darings.'" " And yet you fly to a burner vvhich proffers nought but disappointment and calamity Γ I exclaimed, breathing a heavy sigh. ' ť Oh, Eugenius! your arm can¬ not
not avert the pending evil, cannot stay the awarded stroke ; you cannot bind the bleeding wounds of your country, nor extirpate the poison of sophistry and de-< sign : why not then submit to necessity, and seek peace in obscurity and retire¬ ment ?" " Soon, I fear, will obscurity be the sole alternative for loyalty," mournfully replied De Beaufort ; " soon, defeated in every expectation, vvill policy leave us unaided and unavenged. The intricate designs of courts arc not easily deci¬ phered ; the cause is the same, but ener¬ gy relaxes." " Not vvith you," said Angerville, starting; " no sinister design saps the spring of your patriotism and honour." " Heaven forbid!" eagerly rejoined De Beaufort ; " true patriotism and true honour can never lie second to anv mor¬ tal influence. Oh, mv friend ! if like us, all nerve, all fire, the late scene cf degradation had ne'er been acted! but ι 2 panic
panic has paralyzed a nation's arm, and traitors and regicides, unmasked and shameless, fly in the face of Heaven. If, Ике us ------" ** Like us Γ echoed Angerville, and then he paused; and quick dispelling the ambiguous gloom from his counte¬ nance, continued—" I fear the ripening seeds of disaffection are too widely dis¬ seminated for art or strength to extract : the evil is not of a year's growth—deep- rooted, it but throws off the mask be¬ neath which it long has sculked." "Alas!" sighed madame Angerville, " like a destructive fire, the pen of ge¬ nius spreads the rank mildew, and the insidious doctrine of freethinking saps virtue, and leaves morality an empty name. May the evil no further extend ! may the nations of the earth, appreciat¬ ing the warning, crush the embryo ever in its birth Γ *' Never !" said Angerville, emphati- ca ]ly—« the pestilence goes forth, and health
health sickens in the blast! Never, never ! vice harbours in the heart of man —virtue is but a ready mask wherewith to guise her. There are incentives— there are deep and subtle snares, which mock our best resolves, and urge us in the toil—there are temptations—there are moments------" He paused—he shrunk from the eyes of De Beaufort and his mother, which were ñxed upon him. " What mean you, Charles?" demand¬ ed madame Angerville. " I mean," he resumed, struggling for self-command, and forcing a deceptive smile, " that human nature is so warped and degraded, that her best intentions are perverted, and her energies sunk. Who, after the awful lesson we now read, shall place a barrier to the head¬ strong temperament of passion? In truth, to muse on public wrongs is al¬ most to become a convert to the modern hypothesis : Louis was pious·, virtuous, ι 3 mid
and just, yet man, trampling on every law, murders the lawgiver, and with im¬ punity profanes a higher and a mightier Huler; he------ >" ** Say not with impunity," interrupt¬ ed the shuddering madame Angerville ; " tarry but a season—mark the end of guilt, and then see with vyhat impunity шап transgresses ; liowever, for wise and hidden purposes, Heaven permitteth the reign of oppression, bitter and grievous is the penalty vvhich inevitably falls on the head of the oppressor. The dizzy height of ambition, the maddening maze of passion, may for a time efface the in¬ ward record of our deeds, but the day dawneth when every false lure fading away, leaves us justified or condemned. Oh ! blessed is he who in the silent scru¬ tiny finds his heart pure ! who, uncon¬ taminated by the vices of custom, pray¬ ing for strength, midst the snares of temptation steadfastly preserves the path of honour." Elevated
Elevated by the enthusiasm of her ©wn virtues, her hands and ■ her eyes were uplifted, nor did she note the trem¬ bling self-abased culprit, who writhed beneath her unintentional lash. «Mild, just and beneficent, she suspected no ill where no ill seemed. Judging ever by the purity of her own intentions, she sifted not a single action—she weighed not a single word ; the blush burnt and died away unquestioned, for, alas ! it is guilt, guilt alone vvhich applies the seem¬ ing inferences of virtue. Unable to raise my eyes, I hung my face upon my bosom ; the sob rose, and the tear started, yet I dared not give words to my reelings.—" Would that the hand of friendship had not so rudely se¬ vered the veil of mystery!" I mentally sighed; " vvould that the tale of De Beaufort's apostacy had ne'er been told ! even then the tax of disobedience was heavy, but now it becomes a load too vast for human strength to bear." ι 4 I rose
I rose from rny chair·—I hurried from the parlour—I fled to the cradle of any babe, and bending over it* yielded to the wild agony of remorse and sorrow. My father and Hyacinthe alike rose to mock every dawn of comfort I liad doomed them to misery—I had selfishly sacrificed tlieir claims to my own ima¬ gined happiness—I had eagerly grasped .at the substance, when even the shadow had vanished.—"Angerville, Anger¬ ville," I articulated, " what a wretch hast thou made me !" I started—I shrieked with horror and affright, for a cold hand touched mine, and looking up, I beheld Angerville standing on the other side the cradle : his look was wild—his cheeks livid ; he dropped on his knees—-he seemed to labour for respiration, yet were his eyes rivetted upon me,—" Helena," he falter¬ ed, " let not your reproaches burden on roy soul—add not to the woes which already poison life." " Leave
" Leave me, leave me, Angerville !" I exclaimed-—" tax not my feelings fur¬ ther ! Your mother has held up a mir¬ ror, in which I see and shudder at mv own guilt. Well may she say, * the day dawneth when every false lure fadeth away.' Oh no, no ! peace is not for the vicious ! You have torn away the mask which blinded me—you have stripped every rose from the precipice upon which I totter." " Would I had perished ere I had lowered you in your own eyes !" faltered Angerville: " rouse yourself from the rust of prejudice, and be ignorance a plea to sooth you r How could you gtiess the snare spread for your undoing? l>e Beaufort is the culprit— De Beaufort alone should be the victim Γ " De Beaufort !" I echoed, in a voice of reproach ; " be the heart of De Beau¬ fort spared every pang and every sor¬ row ! Alas ! w/as it man to shrink from the smile of the woman who enslaved ι & him ?
him ? Almost iu the first monaent of meeting, my eyes proclaimed I loved--» a thousand times did they breathe the saiţie confessioçı ; say then, was it man to fly the lure?" " No—Heaven knows it was not!" said Angerville, in accents so broken, that my eyes involuntarily rested on him. " Then is he acquitted," I eagerly re¬ joined ; " for in violating the first law of obedience, the sin was mine." " De Beaufort knew the tie which held him," exclaimed Angerville, " he should have acknowledged that tie : then if love had triumphed—then if------" " Then had I been saved," interrupt¬ ing him, " for my heart, though weak, was innocent" " Would to Heaven he had !" mur¬ mured Angerville; " would to Heaven ------" He paused—he bent over the cra¬ dle—he breathed a heavy sigh; " would to
to Heaven !" he pursued, in a voice low and mournful, ** this infant had never seen the light ' or—■·— M " Or what?" shuddering; " oh, An¬ gerville !" and I stooped down, and kiss¬ ed the downy cheek of my darling. " Ah, my unfortunate friend !" he ex- claimed, taking my hand, and pressing it between his, " knowing wdiat I know, is it an evil wish ?" I bowed my head, but I could not speak—my only answer was a sob. " Heaven knows what I feel for you !" he continued, with all that parade of sympathy which sinks into the easy heart, and * hugs it into snares.' " Oh ! if I could rid v/ou of the burden, spite of my own woes would I save the gentle bosom of my friend." " Thank you—thank you, Angerville ! yet spare not reproach, to heap it on the head of De Beaufort. From the earli¬ est dawn of memory 1 knew myself the uiily blessing of my fatheťs life: de- i o cei ved ^
ceived^ where he most «misted, all bis tenderness centered m ше : I knew how he feved—how he hrøg upon roe; and yei I betrayed his confidence—-murdered hb hopes^Mstened to the voice of й stranger, Atid forgot roy duty! Bitter, yet just, is the pang of retribution : al- feady does it—" " You are unjust, you tre cruel to yourself," interrupted Angerville; "love and nature warred against tbe fanatic designs of your father: how could a heart like yours, warm, tender, glowing, accept the cold and joyless veil of reli¬ gion ? soyoimg, so untutored, how eould you oppose the sensibility which soli¬ tude and mystery had nurtured?—No, Helena, virtue acquits you—your dis¬ obedience is justified: but, alas! you confided where confidence -----* " Hold! hold!" I implored; " accuse him not—condemn him not; remember his heart was free—his affections un¬ shackled ; oh, remember it was love which
which erred, and surely teve may par-* don.* ~_ ** What a heart*-*-wliat a^ mind is yours!" sighed Angerville; "so foil of compassion—so full ci mercy—so alive to yottr own weakness—so dead to the weakness of others! Love¿— nature—-" He paused, yet still his eyes were ri- \-etted npon me. Suddenly starting— " Love," he resumed, ** is a strange, wild, enigmatical frenzy—scoffing at law, it defies rule¿ it tyrannizes over reason : the bliss, the bane of life, it gilds a prison and it clouds a palace—return¬ ed, it is heaven—rejected, hell! Oh, Helena! think you an ardent, raging, tender flame, can be rejected? think you a bleeding, tortured, faithful heart, can be despised ? You admit you have felt the force of love; answer me then—· to me will love be heaven or hell?" ** The calm of heaven dwells not with the tempestuous gusts of passion," I firm¬ ly answered ; ** peace lies within your own
own reach : curb the turbulence ofyour feelings—regulate this hapless, this un* toward p:eeposf«!ession, and submission and content may be regained." " What, without pity-^without com¬ miseration ?" asked Angerville : " no, no! one tear from, the being I worship might ensure « submission, perhaps content—■ one tear, from the bright eye of beauty, like dew distilled upon the parched and burning plains, might revive, might cheer roe ; it would be like the sunbeam on the dark cloud—like the jocund smile of spring on the heels of dank and hoary winter: think you, is it too great a bliss to crave—too great a boon to kneel for? Bring the ease home, picture yourself the sued—Nay, frown not, my friend, there exists no sin infancy : if you knew yourself loved as woman never yet was loved, would you trample on the prof fered heart ? or would you sooth with smiles and looks of mercv ?" " Holy saints ! AngervilL«?, know you vv hat
what you ask ? «Never can the: virtuous- heart smile on $ husband's rivaL? " Then you would crush and bend him even to death!" said Angerville, almost gasping ; " you would heap on him your curse—you would spurn him vvith a glance of fire 1!' " Go,. Angerville," I exclaimed,. " go* шу friend; these sudden gusts terrify me; go, and recall your self commands Were I so unfortunate, I would shrink from the suppliant; I might give him my pity, but I would behold him no more." " Why are you terrified, Helena?" he asked. " Alas ! how little do you know røe ! as soon would I injure this iniant, as injure her gentle mother» You, who know the source of passion, why should ) ou fear its effects ? You have been at Eglissure, and every thing which re¬ minds me of Eglissure is treasured and dear to memory." % ' I thought, Angerville," I reproach^ fullv
fully exclaimed* ·** time and resolutioir were to have exsptmged the dream of Egtessttre? Did-yon not promise*——" ** I can die/ interrupting me, * but I eannot -ejèptínge it Aro I to blame, if from nátarďs roa^rpiece I imbibe a subtle poison? would you laugh at the poor moth scathed by the rays of attrac¬ tion? Like Й, I hovered around the flame—like it¿ I*—" He paused ; then with a heavy «igh, eoncluded—" The victim of disastrous love in the grave alone can hope for freedom." " In the grave, Angerville ! know you what you my? and your mother—must she steep that grave ro tears ? must she bury her last hope y and say r in the bit¬ terness of sorrow, ' ingratitude and head¬ strong passion aimed the blow?' Rather let her bless the virtuous struggles of her son, and daim him as the surest prop her age ean rest on. In infancy,» how often, as I now hang over this in¬ fants has she hung over you—wasted the
the midnight hour in watching—prayed for your health-—and marked your grow* ing strength with anxious aching inte¬ rest ! Pay back the debt you owe ; give her more than life—give her peace of mind. You are aflfected, roy friend— the tear starts to you r eye : Heaven grant it cool the fever within ! Be resolute, An¬ gerville, and the victory's your own." I paused, but still his lips were sealed, his looks w r ere bent upon roe, and his arms folded upon his breast.—" A roind exalted, noble as your own," I continued, " sinks not in vile debasement. The fettered slave, who struggles hard for freedom, ensures our pity and our ad¬ miration; but he who hugs his chains, and glories in their ignominious clank, deserves at best our censure. The roan who fans a selfish passion in his heart—* who ----- -" " Spare me, Helena—your words are daggers ! I am not the selfish wretch you would imply—I have not polluted yet
yet the ear of virtue—I have not dared so mueh~*-you alone have listened to my story, Helena, believe me, when on my soul I swear, now, at this moment, do I reverence the cold chastity love would melt—do I------" ** Say not love," interrupting him ; ** no, no! passion, not love: love exalts the sentiments—love purifies the heart —love martyrs every feeling, sacrifices every hope to the honour and the wdi- being of its object! Love is the pure essence of heaven—passion but a de¬ grading substitute, wliich debases human reason. Love " * k De Beaufort's Γ interrupted Anger¬ ville. I started, as though an asp had cross¬ ed me—the veil of enthusiasm was rent asunder—the pang of that moment a refinement of torture, which the inqui¬ sitorial rack could scarce have devised : my eyes closed even against the image of my sleeping innocent—I buried my face-
face in my hands, and the tears vvhich hung on my burning cheeks felt to scald as they flowed. I, too, stood the victim and the slave of mere passion—fame had been its bleeding sacrifice, and De Beau¬ fort condemned by the lips of her who had so madly loved him ! Alas ! vvhat hut passion vv as the tic vvhich bound us— lawless, uncurbed, uncontrollable passion? The mist seemed to fade away—the de¬ lusion to vanish : vain was it to guise my feelings in false and borrowed rays: it was passion which had hoodwinked niy reason—which had led me from the shelter of my father's arms: but for pas¬ sion, I might have been chaste and pure as the flower vvhich blossomed in my na¬ tive valley—but for passion, life had passed in innocence and honour—but for passion, reproach had never reached me in a shape so galling.—" Holy Mary !" I articulated, " are we indeed the degraded votaries of mere passion ? are we so lost, so fallen? Passion is short-lived— De Beaufort '
Beaufort! De Beaufort! ifl should sur¬ vive thine Γ That if was madness— I feltas though the picture were alread} T realized, and sobs of hysterie violence swelled my bo¬ som. " Fear it not," said Angerville : " call it passion, if you will, but the passion you inspire must be eternal ! No, no y my too-sensitive friend, you are not de¬ graded—you are not fallen ; you are the victim of circumstances which Virtue's self would pardon. I too love De Beau¬ fort, and fain would palliate the errors of his conduct : but yours was not a mind to beguile by artifice—yours was not a heart to entrap with deceit : open as the arch of heaven—pure as its own angels, your innocence should have been a safeguard—your implicit confidence^ your artless trust, a shield sacred in the breast of honour! De Beaufort should have fled from Sicily—he might have nourished the poison in his own heart, until,.
until, like mine, it had consumed it— until, dead and joyless, peace and every gilded hope had fled." Angerville ceased, but I could not ansvver—I couid not justify ; my spirits were gone, and, alas ! the cause was too weak for defence; I could not argue when writhing with remorse—I dared not extenuate against the dictates of my reason.— " Leave me, Angerville," I implored, in answer to all he could urge ; u it is reflection alone wdiich can appease the tumult your words have awakened." He did leavfc me, but the tumult did not subside. I could not pray—I could not bow in meekness and submission ; the avenging curse of my father fell heavy upon me—the hour of its fulfil¬ ment seemed arrived, and hope felt to wither beneath a blight so deadly. I snatched my child from her calm slum¬ ber—I hid her crying in my bosom.— " God of compassion !" I articulated, ** ward
" ward off the impending curse—dis¬ charge on my head the full vial of thy wrath, but spare this unconscious, this unoffending infant ! I alone am the sin¬ ner—I violated the early laws of obedi¬ ence-*-! transgressed the prescribed rules of duty—I deluded the eye of caution —I abused the trast of confidence—I wrung the heart of affection, and doom¬ ed a parent's hopes to disappointment and to woe ! Oh, let my misery expiate , all! let my remorse—let the scalding tears of my contrition be an accepted offering! My father—my father! recall tlie bitter curse—on me, not on mine, be thy anathema exhausted '" The voice of De Beaufort roused me to exertion ; he called on my name, and rny heart flew to meet him—he sought me with tenderness, ană my tears turned to smiles. He gently reproached my love of solitude, and all but tbe present moment vanished. Bound as by a spell —held as by the influence of enchant¬ ment,
ment, in his presence my reason and roy conscience were hushed to sleep ; in his presence tliere was no room for com¬ plaint or murmur — no dissatisfaction —no sorrow. Oh no ! till torn for ever from his arms—till the grave had left me nought but the recollection of his image, the start of repentance was tran¬ sient and perishable—scarce awakened ere expunged by the magic breath of love. Alike precious was the sin and the binucr! his smiles forbad remorse— lıiş arms encompassed nought but bliss. Had he lived—had the plottings of trea¬ chery been described·—had the iron grasp of calamity been retarded—had—— Alas ! шу weak brain ! what is tem¬ poral to eternal welfare—what the flit¬ ting sunshine of this life to the infinity of eternal glory? Are we not told<— " Whatever is is right ?" why then shpuld we cavil ? Stranger, stranger, I must pause : I vvould fain think so, but the
the correction is heavv—the lesson hard to con.
CHAPTER VII.
The only trance of peace in which my wretched feelings ever slumbered was now rapidly drawing to a close—the leave of absence was expiring, and De Beau¬ fort preparing to depart, A rayless, a deathlike forebodence hung upon my spirits í I was not superstitious, yet the very sighing of the wind seemed as the fearftil prognostic of approaching fate. A sound, a word, filled me with dread ; if I saw him smile, my sigh of anguish seemed to reproach him-—if I traced a cast of thought upon his features, then did I tremble lest the same cloud enve¬ loped alike our anticipations. Madame
Madame Angerville chided my fears ; she told me youth was the season for hope, not despondence. Alas! it was more than fear—it was a dire, a mortal presage of misery ! It was that winter of the soul which owns no spring— which nips every resuscitating ray of cheerfulness! I had no solace in my own reflections : if I turned my eyes in¬ wards, darkness and woe, and fell re¬ morse environed me ! The presence of De Beaufort was the only lure which could draw me from myself; his smile was a powerful talisman, which recon¬ ciled every past sacrifice ; repentance fled the circle of his arms, and the angry frown of my father but transiently ob¬ scured the dawn of present bliss. It was in tiie cheerless blank of absence that I started at the magnitude of my own guilt !—it was when sleep fled my couch, and restlessness and apprehension steeped my pillow in tears, that conscience ever appealed, and my stricken heart drooped vol. u, к in
in the seru tirìy ! It was theh that «a flfou- t>3Tnd wild projects flitted before roe!— it was then tliat the garb and tiie voca¬ tion -of -religion first offered something üke hope ! Even at that early period, I believe my brain was at times affected ; 'strange fancies, strange inconsistencies, possessed it; and when the sluices ofsor- row were exhaustedi^-when I could not weep, it felt so tight and so burning, that often in the night I would throw open the window, and, leaning from it, eagerly catch every breath of wind which scudded the dark clouds firom the hea* Vens! Yes, even then reason tottered— no wonder tbat since she should liave been overthrown! Oh no, no—grief èoç& not kill, but it undermines: it is like a subtle poison, intperceptibly sap¬ ping the springs of life ; it is not the less bitter, because the more merited—ra¬ fter does conviction, by aggravating the ßting, arm it with redoubled poignancy ! Few are Ле ills inflicted by Provi¬ dence,
dence, which the mind of man cannot sustain ; it is those evils entailed by Ms own restless passions which ever infuse the gnawing gangrene of dissatisfection and complaint ! Religion aids the pious spirit—religion dissipates the clouds of calamity! but the conscience, at war with itself, owns no resource against the inroads of care, disappointment, and mi¬ sery ! A thousand thousand tears may be shed, vet will the last tear scald the soul as much as the first tear penance extorts! Flowery is the path of guilt— the thorns hid—the roses vivid ; sweet to the smell—beauteous to the'eye; but all surface—all treacherous—all decep¬ tive! the footway slippery—the abyss despair Γ Like the apple of Sodom, it beguiles the unwary—it lures unto death ! taste it, and you are lost—stretch fdrfti your hand to grasp it, aiid health and strength wither! * * % * Two days previous to theSê^arture Ôf De Beauforť, whether fròtìi acciďeiit or к 3 design,
design, I was alone in the parlour vvith Angerville ; his heart seemed full, and «i, Heaven knows, felt a load of care, vvhich threatened to crusli me. He watched the tumult in my feelings—he marked the unbidden tear, and the tremulous agitation of my whole frame.—" Why do you yield to despondence?" he in¬ quired?—" why do you anticipate ills which may never arrive ? Banish your fears, my gentle friend; no evil threa¬ tens : we shall be safe among a host of enemies—for w T ill not your prayers be with us?" " Ceasç, Angerville," I implored; ** mock me not with vain compliments. Alas! the trial is almost beyond my strength ; I would fain assume something like fortitude, but feeling defies the power." " I mock you !" mournfully repeated Angerville; " you know not my heart, Helena, or you would not tax it with a irjiarge so heavy: believe roe, it is no mockery ;
mockery; at this moment I too could shed tears—I could act the woman, and weep until I blushed at my own weak¬ ness! In quitting this retreat, I bid adieu to all the indulgence of sickly fancy—to the few melancholy plea.sures my cruel fate has left me ! I bid a long adieu to my mother—to you too, my kind admonisher; and oh, believe me, among the sweetest moments of my ex¬ istence, your friendship mingles !" ** In the active scenes of life," I ex¬ claimed, ** you will lose your cares: may it prove so !·—may friendship supersede every other impression!—may you re¬ turn to Schaf hausen with a heait at ease and a brow unclouded !" Angerville forced a faint smile.— " Y^ou speak," he observed, " like one unhackneyed in the passion ; the sensible lities of nature are not so easily curbed, or the wandering affections shackled ! No, my friend—no, my friend—the flame w hich bums in my bosom will descend к 3 wdth
л me to the grave ! death is roy only pass to freedom ! Should circumstances change—should fortune smite—should love surmount all seeming obstacles* then will transcendant bliss be mine, and joy counterpoise every past endurance ì The female heart is not ungrateful : tell me, Helena, in the diffuse prodigality of hope, may I not cling to the shadow of a single beam ? ' " I fear me, Angerville," I exclaimed, " hope, in a cause like yours, aids but the fever : your mind should dwell alone on the obstacle, not on that faint ray of possibility, which shines but to cozen." " Think you," he demanded, " if the galley-slave ne'er pictured freedom, he could support his lot? Oh no, no! hope к the soul of bliss—the vital spark—-the ethereal essence which dissipates the clouds of care, and lightens the ills of existence ! He who harbours not hope, is lost indeed !" " It is in vain, Angerville, to contend with
with a mind so infatuated—with regret) I relinquish the contest. Once you al¬ most promised resistance ; but now you are borne down tlie current !—now, with¬ out a struggle, you sink into the vortex ivhich must destroy you !—now----- -r" " Cruel friend," interrupting me, " would you take from me the only so¬ lace of a miserable existence? Would you annihilate a passion which constitutes the felicity of my being—which taught me the value of life—and vvhich gives a consequence to future years, which no¬ thing else can bestow ?" " Ye , Angerville, 1 vvould indeed snap the thraldom—I would indeed dissolve the spell, for it leads to despair! its track is hopeless, and its indulgence criminal !" " Criminal !" he reproachfully echoed ; " senseless is the being who beholds un¬ moved the perfect works of nature ! Am I to be condemned, because, when my eyes rest on her masterpiece, the image sinks into my heart? No, Helena—the к 4 cold
cold axioms of the world are too rigid : if it is a crime to love, why did nature curse us with the passion ? Not for the universe vvould I be otherwise tlmn what I am! the poison is ecstatic, the deli¬ rium sw r eet! I know my danger—I know the abyss against which you warn me; but I am impelled forward—destiny guides the reins—resistance ceases ! If I live, I may yet be blessed—if I die, you, and you alone, can bear record of my story !" His voice was broken—his words call¬ ed the tears into my eyes ; the fate of De Beaufort, too, was alike doubtful, and sadness and care pressed heavy on my spirits. " Thank Heaven, I shall not fall un¬ pitied !" he resumed ; " the tear of friend¬ ship will embalm my memory ! Should I live, perhaps------" He paused; he seemed to struggle with his own feelings —then, with a forced smile, resumed.— " In two days I return to an active sta¬ tion—
tion —in tw T o days every energy of my mind must be called into being: perhaps you may never know the struggle wdiich passes in my heart: should you, pity me !—sliould you not, pray for me !" "Yet a moment stay!" I implored, for already was his hand placed upon the lock ; " ere you go, calm the agony of an anxious mind—another opportunity may not offer. Twice has your hand averted the stroke of death! Should zeal, or rashness, or misfortune, or dan¬ ger, menace the life of De Beaufort, be friendship still the firm shield of my re¬ liance! Holy saints! Angerville, how you tremble! your eyes are wild, and your lips livid : Angerville, are you ilP- are you------ >' " No, no—quite well. A little faint¬ ness—no more," tottering to a chair, and sinking, almost gasping ; " it is my se¬ cret—it is my feelings! Now, now I am better—now I can breathe!" and he raised his hand to his forehead. " He- к 5 lena/'
lena," recovering himself, " bear with me —makesome allowance for a brain almost crazed! Ah, think of my sorrows— think ofthe dagger your words conveyed to my heart ! Alas ! did they not betray the fetal contrast 'twixt De Beaufort's fate and mine?—he so loved, so cherish¬ ed—I so solitary, so forlorn ! Oh God ! what would I give to be valued as he is valued—to be mourned as he would be mourned ! His death would be worth ten thousand lives, doomed, like mine, to blank and joyless celibacy !" " These uncontrolled emotions terrify roe !" I exclaimed. " Angerville, what am I to think—wiiat am I to hope? You forget your mother—you forget the gratitude which nature claims !" " True," he faltered; " at that mo¬ ment I remembered nought but my own isolated destiny—I saw nought but a prospect joyless, vapid, and unsocial ! The sport of fortune, my life whiles away in storms and tempests ! All the illusions
illusions of my youth are blasted^—all the gay scenes of sanguine promise wrecked! cares and regrets spring in my bosom, and dissatisfaction and despair sprinkle grey hairs upon my brow ! Forgive me, Helena, and hear me, when I swear to cherish the remembrance of this scene— to muse o'er it, even in the battle's heat ! to dwell upon your words—to watch over your charge with that sacred vigi¬ lance, wliich unwearied friendship can alone produce !" " May Heaven guard the lives of both !" I solemnly articulated. " xVnger- ville," and I extended my hand, and pressed his with the warm fervour of gra¬ titude, " your w r ords are balm to my feelings, and your promises a reHance which will sooth and support me in the lone hours of absence ! Yes, in the mid¬ night gloom, when sleep flies my pillow, they will be a panacea to corroding woe ! My child too shall bless the preserver of her father, and lisp the name of Anger- к 6 viile
ville in her earliest orisons ! Innocence and infancy will waft to the Throne of Grace, will supplicate on your head peace, prosperity, and bliss !" In silence he pressed my hand to his Hps, and I read, in the sraile which brightened his features, an assurance which chased despair. But though my reliance so firmly rested on the promises, and friendship, and known zeal of An¬ gerville—though I felt satisfied that he would never slumber o'er his charge, but, exerting every power of body and mind, avert each threatened danger, still a thousand fears tortured imagination, and life itself appeared blank and rayless: though so young, woefully had I partaken of its cares, whilst its promises had smiled but to cozen. Alas! what single year could I retrace, unmixed with bitterness? —what period could I dwell upon, which gave not a pang to memory?—what scene could I revisit, which wrung not a tear from the heart of sensibility ? for whether
whether misfortune reach us through others, through our own errors, or through adverse fate, it is still misfortune, mourned, and deeply registered! On me, in every capacity, it has lowered— as a daughter, as a wife, as a mother ! Yes, there too was hope blighted ! Oh, it was a kilHng, dreadful blight Ì But the corrupt heart needs correction, and Hea¬ ven chasteneth in mercy ! I have heard the holy sisters say, that piety is the only antidote to woe—is the bright pharos which lures from the fatal depths of sin and darkness^—is like oil to the festering wound—is sweet as the honey of Hymettus to the stricken spirit ! Ah, sure it is so ! Often has the solemn swell of the organ excited tears, when every efíbrt failed—when my glazed eyes forgot the bliss of weeping ! Often have the impressive rites of religion wrought composure, when my mind and feelings havo been in a state of almost maddened tumult! Often, when lost to hope— when
when writhing hi despair and horror, has the voice of promise sounded—has the page of inspiration cheered !■— " Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow ; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool." Father Omnipotent ! «* heal me, and I shall be healed ; save me r and I shall be saved !" There are days—there are anniversa¬ ries, when prayer is my only resource ! when, witbout food and without rest, I lock myself in the chapel, and pass hours on the stone steps of the altar!—when, in supplication for the souls of the de¬ parted, I humble myself to the dust, and tear open every wound of memory to expiate and to punish í Oh, if I knew how deeper to rive my heart—if I knew how to extort tears of blood for past transgressions—I would woo the atone¬ ment, I wrould bless the propitiation, and cling for mercy, through absolving pe¬ nance ! Yes, I would watch until my eyes forgot to sleep—I would kneel un¬ til
til my pliant sinews stiffened to contrac¬ tion—I would fast until famished nature loathed and sickened at the food she craved for ! A breathing corse, I would renounce all but endurance—all but re¬ morse—all but sufferance—all but afflic¬ tion! Even now the mother superior expostulates: beneficent and merciful, because my cheeks are wan, my eyes rayless, and my form wasted, she would fain relax my penance—she would fein persuade me my vigils are too rigid! Ah ! she knows not the crimes of my youth, nor the woes which drove me from the world, nor the persevering guilt of my heart ! How can she dream, that even at the altar's foot the image of De Beaufort pursues me ?—that memory still fondly clings to him ?—that his voice sounds in the night-breeze?—that his re¬ membrance gilds roy lonely pillow?— that he lives eternally m roy fancy ?— that he colours every sigh which wafts to Heaven? How can she dream, that iu
in a living tomb like this the rose of sin" blossoms?—that this veil, shrouding the brow, excludes not the wanderings of the imagination ? Oh no, no, no —she knows not the waywardness of my na¬ ture—she knows not that all my efforts cannot expunge the past—that guilt, deep and corrosive, still wars agamst hu¬ manity ! Week after week, month after month, year after year, roll away, yet stffi am I a self-condemned criminal, un¬ worthy of life and light—still in this сей do I bewail my crimes, and supplicate mercy and pardon ! ·****■*# The dreaded dawn of departure ar¬ rived ;- despondence and grief hung upon all our features : in the bosom of raa-i dame Angerville resignation commanded something like composure ; but in mine all was tumult and despair. De Beau¬ fort tried to veil his feelings; Angerville forced himself to speak on the rage of party, and the necessity for active ser¬ vice
vice—on the strange vicissitudes of the times, and the revolutionary prediction of universal emancipation. What was the language of disaffection to me?— what the oratory ofa thousand despots? My ears were deaf to all—my eyes were fixed on the care-fraught countenance of my love—and my stifled sobs rose almost to suffocation. Harrowing was the moment of part¬ ing : alas ! every former sorrow faded in the comparison. My heart felt to die within me ; I threw myself into the arms of Eugenius —I tried to speak, but I could not utter one distinct sentence—I could not breathe one of the hundred ten¬ der charges which rose to my lips; I could only clasp him with frenzied fer¬ vour, whilst mournful and heart-rending cries were all which escaped me. The distress of Angerville, too, was heavy; but I had no feelings for others' woe—no perception beyond self: what wa&
was the grief of son, of mother, compared to roine? Save De Beaufort, I had no claim—banished from his arms, I had no hope F The parting agony of soul and body could not be more bitter: every sense was stricken—-every feeling rived; in all the wide, the immeasurable regions of the creation, not another friend could I rely on—not another heart beat in unison with my own ! blank de¬ solation hung on every prospect—misery and despair persecuted almost unto death ! The filial tie was severed—the claims of kindred unknown : no palliative soothed my wretchedness—no one consolatory whisper lightened my affliction. Cold and pale as marble, I watched them from the window; and when De Beaufort waved a last adieu—when en¬ vious distance bid hiro firoro my sight— when the last darkened speck vanished, every power felt to vanish with it! Deep groans convulsed roy bosom—roy hands
hands were» clasped—my eyes raised tø heaven, and not one single tear relaxed the anguish of my brain. Blessed saints ! why should I strive to express feelings which acute sensibility can alone conceive? What, alas l m the shape of misery, can the human heart sustain, whicli mine has not endured? Have I not lived to see every hope wrecked ? madly to call on death, e'en though I shuddered at hereafter judg¬ ment? Alarmed at my statue^like aspect, madame Angerville, forgetful of her own sorrow, tried to sooth and to soften. She led me, unresisting, from the window— she essayed, by every conciliatory argu¬ ment, to awaken roe to exertion; and when tears rewarded her efforts, in en¬ couraging them, she saved roe from fren¬ zy. Ah, what do I not owe her,' what claims has she upon my gratitude ! And yet #1ш protracted but the blank, whidi since has often followed. Then calamity wras
was ideal—now 'tis overwhelming ! Ther* I wept in anticipation—now reality presses like a weight of lead upon my heart ! Then the black catalogue of hu¬ man iHs was fancy's coinage—now me¬ mory is torture, and youth a retrospect, threatening the seat of reason! In one little instant, what a chillmg cloud hung on every prospect! for so completely are we the creatures of casualty, that our internal feelings ever take colour from external circumstances. Melancholy and gloom veiled all around ; the aspect of nature was changed, and each local ob¬ ject shrouded in despondence: wailing and woe sounded in the night breeze ; and the very gurgling of tiie river breath¬ ed the cadence of sadness In vain roy kind observant friend urged the necessity of resolution— irr vain she besought roe to control my feelings, recurring again and again to the sorrows of her own youth. I eould weep with her, but I could not acquire forti- : tude.
tude. I had never sought to curb the swelling tide of sensibility; and now, hke every other lurking weakness, by indulgence it had become despotic. Oh, it is a sweet, but a pernicious gift ! es¬ timable when swayed by reason—de¬ structive when quickened by the breath of passion ! But the untutored bosom spurns the axioms of experience, and the golden lore of wisdom must be sought in labour and in tears. Niglit came; and released from the necessity of restraint, I buried myself in my chamber : to seek peace, to woo com¬ posure, were alike impossible; De Beau¬ fort was far distant, and my heart sick¬ ened in the consciousness. Agitated and distressed, I hung over my babe—I traced, in her calm slumbers, the con¬ trast of my own perturbation ; I prayed for her future prosperity—-to avert the evils of this life—to shield her from the nipping blight whieh had destroyed alike «iy peace and honour—to defend her against
against the snares of sentiment«—to arm her against the fatal trials of the heart !— " Oh love, love !" I apostrophized, " to thy subtle influence be ascribed all the goading thorns in maturity ! In infancy we are happy, because thy arrows are powerless ! In age we are at peace, be¬ cause thy arrows are blunted !" I stole softly to the window; and though the dark canopy of heaven was unstudded by a single star—though, en¬ veloping each surrounding object, " night o'er all her sable mantle threw," my eyes sought the direction where I had lost sight of De Beaufort and tears and ago¬ nizing sobs succeeded. Towards morning I crept to my soli¬ tary pillo w ; my child lay warm in my bosom, but my thoughts journeyed with her worshipped father; for even vvhen wearied nature, exhausted by the agita¬ tion of the day, sought a respite, fre¬ quent starts and heavy murmurs checked Tepose; sometimes De «Beaufort smiled in
in happiness, then, covered with wounds and blood, I savv him faint and dying at my feet. Varied and torturing were the fevered phantoms of imagination, de¬ structive to sleep, harrowing to sensibi¬ lity. When I awoke, the dappled dawn of day beamed through the window ; but though " Ni^ht, and all her sickly dews, Пег ь;;о с tie.» wan, ..nd buds of boding cry," were fled, I almost feared to look around the chamber, lest my eyes should en¬ counter the horrors fancy had depleted. I arose unrefreshed, for that cordial to the sick soul, content, was wanting. Again did madame Angerville kindly admonish—again did she dwell upon re¬ signation and hope : but my full heart was deaf to her counsels ; peace had fled with Eugenius, and time alone could soften the blank of absence ; time, that universal panacea, whieh stifles thé voice of
of lamentation, and chases anguish even from the stroke of deatii í Time, which reconciles affliction—time, which ex¬ punges all, save the inward conscious¬ ness of guilt ! My infant was nature's surest, sweetest comforter; her smile seemed to reproach my sadness—her ca¬ resses to beguile the pressure of sorrow —her sportive innocence to call me to myself: like a bright and dazzling sun, she gilded futurity—she spread the rich burnish of expectation and of promise: and such is the strange compound of which the human heart is comprised, that hope, apparently dead in my bosom, gradually revived ; nay, springing, like the phcenix, from her own ashes, she fanned with her gayest illusions. Even now Joes my bosom heave vvith min¬ gled pain and pleasure, as I recall those cheating images, those sanguine dreams, when, living again in my child, my " mind's eye" pierced futurity !—when I saw the fair promise of infancy expand into
into womanhood— no blight nipping the bud—no mildew cankering the blossom •—lovely and innocent, her hand wiping from my cheek every trace of sorrow— her arm supporting my steps through the vale of yearis—her affection smooth¬ ing the pillow of death with gentleness and duty ! Holy and blessed saints ! the last look, the last cherub smile—how could I tear her from my arms ! liow could I fly and leave her in distance ! w r hy did I not stay and perish vvith my child !—Angerville ! Angerville! of what hast thou bereft me! Every rose hast thou torn from the path of life, and the thorns, the sharp and festering thorns, hast thou affixed in my bosom i
4 OL. IL L CHAP-
CHAPTER VIII.
In sad and mournfui„expetľ^ tlon > wee ks slowly wore aw r ay ; the halmy »Z 1 * 63 !" of spring owned no charm for me— ~ т У eyes wandered over its first offerings without gratitude; the pale primrose, the modest snowdrop, the golden crocus, the purple violet, scattered like ame¬ thysts on an emerald bank, claimed not one smile of gladness—to me they were no harbingers of joy, for rapine and slaughter, awakening from their short cessation, impressed on my fancy nought but images of horror. The triumphs of republicanism, the jar of party, the de¬ clamatory harangues of agitators and emissaries, false glory, and mistaken zeal, alike blinding justice and reason, successively filled my mind, leaving in it no room for peace. Intelligence
Intelligence was uncertain, yet had we thrice heard from the army ; Anger¬ ville had written to his mother— DeBeau¬ fort had tried to calm and restore my spirits, by the fondest transcripts of de¬ voted love. He dw T elt again and again on the anticipated bliss of return, on tlie joyous transport of a reunion—tenderly besought me to cherish his image, and in the caresses and infant endearments of our child, to white away the tedious hours of absence^—to call to mind the ardour of his aflection—to rely on his truth vvith never-wavering confidence Sacredly did he promise, when once re¬ stored to the home of his hopes, to live and die in its shelter—to forsake it no more—to grasp no more tiie sword of war—to defend no more the outraged rights of an ungrateful fallen country, or to brave danger in the field of contest. " Rest in peace, my Helena," he wrote, ·* honour and frantic zeal shall no more hue me from your bosom; alreadv have I, 2 I proved
I proved their fallacy-—the buoyant vi¬ sions of patriotism are chiroerical, for power, and fete herself, appear to war against us. I dare not give form to roy idea&—I dare not mould the wild fears of fancy : alas! the mask is almost drop¬ ped—the study of policy almost relin¬ quished; selfaggrandizeroent lurks be¬ neath pretended service, and indignation and despair annihilates the hopes of every loyal emigrant (Mi that I were again at Schaf hausen! Disgust succeeds re- Mance* for dark and terrible pictures of degradation and dismemberment menace devoted France." In every line I traced gloom and dis¬ satisfection ; I read a mind spurning at injury, yet curbing the very darings of suspicion—¿proud and hostile—dignified ýet subdued. His former letters were full of gay anticipation and lively anec¬ dote, eonveying the movements and or¬ ganization of the army, and expressive of thosfeí hopes to which the force and î* magnanimity
magnanimity of the combined powers had given birth* Those letters teemed with interest and intelligence : but who has not read the campaigns of 1793— the struggles of party—the alternate success and defeat of power—the ensan¬ guined contests which succeeded the mock trial and sacrilegious murder of the august Louis—the rise and fall of Dumourier—his boasts and his vain¬ glory, his overthrow and his flight? Why then should the mind be called to the field of slaughter—why should it pass from victory to victory, from horror to horror ? Alas ! to me it would be a painful recapitulation of past sorrows, for De Beaufort shared in every danger, and unrourmuringly braved the priva¬ tions of his altered fortune. In the bloody battle of Nerwinde, how roust his heart have mourned the disgrace of his country ! In the same spot, on the same field where but one century before France bad reaped laurels-^where, led by L 3 the
the marshal Luxemburg, her legions had gained a signal victory over William the Third, there did he see her prowess humbled^-there did the life's blood of her son& flow in dishonour-^there the fell slaves of a lawdess republic tarnished the claims to glory !~But I transgress ; the letter of De Beaufort uot to record that eventful era, be my aim. Sympathizing in every pang which could wound the heart of him I foved, I mourned over this nipping blight, and fervently supplicated. Heaven for the safety and preservation of a life dearer, far dearer, than my own. The letter of Angerville was even roote explicit; he without scruple ar- raigned the injusticeof policy, and spoke ofthe views of conquest with execration and disgust**—" Justice has fled from among men/ he wrote, " and self-ag- grandizement and sinister design lurk beneath tbecoVerrog of proffered service «Dd pretended fellowship; for what is conquest
conquest but robbery, wben the right of subjugation is claimed and enforced by the victor? To be happy, we must henceforth renounce all intercourse with man—we must fly the haunts of society, and seek for peace in the narrow circle of our own home—we must suspect every profession, and decipher self-in¬ terest in every smile. Alas ! duped by power and policy, we can now only de¬ plore the evil, without warding off the threatened consequences; we must see our bleeding country ravaged without hope, and without revenge. Yes, roy mother, we mustreturn to Sebafhausen —we must exchange the sword for the sickle, and weep for those ills we cannot avert. The blow is struck—the moral virtues are annihilated—discord reigns throughout, and generosity and disin¬ terestedness are but empty shadows, which sound but to cozen ! The mask is thrown off—the proclamation of the al¬ lied powers, disclaiming all intention of L 4 conquest,
conquest, is revoked, and new and un¬ equivocal declarations stigmatize justice andimmanity! France is threatened with a foreign yoke, arid the congress at Antwerp crushes every spring of patriot¬ ism. Yes, the bright dream of loyalty is blighted-—we must return; to Schaf- hausen, fór here our arm is no longer needed.'* ** Charles is ever the dupe of his own feelings," thoughtfully observed macteme Angerville : *' led away by impulse, he forgets that passion may injure, but can¬ not aid: little calculated to cope with the wary and the designing, spurning the guise of policy, frank and incautious, he yields to the idle sallies of indigna¬ tion, without once considering the fetal weakness of his own cause, without re¬ flecting on the force and power of those he would condemn. In every exigence of life, ctímness and moderation is the surest'proeednre, for whether in private orin public, tbe intemperate gusts of pas¬ sion
sion expose to ridicule and to contempt." Holy Heaven ! such were the words of madame Angerville ! Hard, hard is it to decipher the heart of man—to dive amid his thoughts—to discover his real unvarnished sentiments! Even she— even his own anxious tender mother, lived and died a stranger to the charac¬ ter of Angerville ! She who had reared him in infancy—she who had watched the opening dawn of reason, the gradual spring of intellect—she too was blinded; for he possessed that address, that plau¬ sible insinuation, whieh, " finding an open easy passage to the heart, scatters flowers along the avenues* as it goes." How then could I suspect an artifice so deep-^how descry a subterfuge so subtle , —how unmask an hypocrisy so pro- . found ? Guileless mysel£ I judged~tha heart unvitiated, and gave a ready ere dence to the studied tale which had mis- , led my judgment «AngeryiUe I Ariger.- villél was it passion which subverted thy L 5 principles—
principle«?—which laid waste thy inte¬ grity—which corrupted thy honour ? or wert thou by nature the easy dupe of vice, enslaved by each passing gust, and wearing but the semblance of virtue ? Alas ! what mysteries^ w T hat inconsis¬ tencies are there in human nature ! Are we indeed organized with the same pro¬ pensities, with the same feelings? If so, how incomprehensible are the devi¬ ations of character ! Deeply interested in the contents of the letters, the day wore away in dis¬ course. Again and again did we ques¬ tion the messenger, listening and trem¬ bling at the catalogue of enormities he recited, dwelling on the scenes of car¬ nage, and encouraging disclosures hos¬ tile to peace. Madame Angerville mourned the overthrow of hope—I se- «sretly exulted in the promised return of De Beaufort ; she lived for tiie world— I lived for royself; she wept the total ruin of France—I heeded not the ruin of a whole
a whole world, so that De Beaufort was restored to roy prayers : my spirits rose in the anticipation, and even her gloomy prognostics damped not their ardour— " Happiness will again be mine," I men¬ tally apostrophized, " and care and sor¬ row will fly the presence of my love ! Blessed, thrice blessed intimation ! Es¬ caping the perils of war, surmounting 4 privations and dangers, in the lap of peace, in the bosom of confidence, my Eugenius seeks repose !" Ah, how did every aspect vary ! how did my full heart exult in the promise of coming- joy ! Creation glowed with a brighter burnish—the hills, the woods, tiie waters, catching the soft redundance, smiled in harmony and beauty. My eyes rested on the landscape, my fancy pic¬ tured De Beaufort wandering amid their shades, his arm supporting my steps, his voiee, " sweet as the shepherd's pipe up¬ on the mountain," beguiling ще of every former sorrow.—" Yes, we .will live for L o' each
each other," I articulated ; " we will for¬ swear a cold-hearted world; in the de¬ lightful trance of happiness and love, we vvill forget every public »wrong, we will watch over the infant dawnings of our cherub, and rearing her mind to viitue, curbing the early glow of sensibility, training the expanding germ of intellect, vve vvill review in her youth the hopes f and transports of our own !" Sicily, my native Sicily, rose to view —the secluded, the almost u n trodden vale of Di Brolo —the lone cottage of mv father—the holy hermitage of the pious Ciiristian—the fatal introduction of De Beaufort. I trembled—I groaned in despair—1 vvould fain have expunged the picture, but I could not—memory was too accurate, the coincidence too impressive ; the bland smile of first in¬ citement—the new-born hope—the sto¬ len glance of love recurred—the clan- destine intercourse—the studied arts to beguile a parents caution. * . Ah'
Ah! what solitude can exclude the wandering, the unlicensed foot? vvhat precepts arm the youthful heart against the witchery of passion ? Another De Beaufort might arise-—an otlier series of disguise, of weakness, of disobedience ; the filial link might again be severed, and in infirmity and age I might be abandoned by my own offspring—in an¬ guish and in death I might call upon her name iu vain—1 might beseech her in frenzy, when far beyond the reach of iny wailings! I wrung my hands in despair; the re¬ proaches of conscience were loud and appalling—the retribution would be but just; I had violated the eariy ties of du¬ ty, and could find no solace in retro¬ spection—my heart was against me, and the mists of passion vvere dispersed· What though I passed whole years in watching and in warning? Chance might , overthrow all my caution, and. nature » and sensibility inveigle «ul the snare. * My
My injured, my abandoned father, had reared me almost in hatred of mankind —had instilled suspicion from the very cradle—had taught me to picture deceit in every profession—to fly from my fel¬ low-creatures as from pestilence and death —to estrange myself from the world-— to shrink from all its incitements and all its promises 1 Yet how soon was the les¬ son overthrown ! how soon the monition expunged! The very first glance was conclusive, for the ardent persuasions of a stranger perverted every rule—his name unknown—his connexions, his si¬ tuation, his prospects all unthought of— all sunk in the dazzling lure of appear¬ ance ! Alas ! my own life was a series of weakness and crime, of ingratitude and disobedience : how then could I look to the maturity of my child—how antici¬ pate the future, without the dread of ex¬ piatory punishment ! Saddened and dismayed, I couid only weep in secret the gloomy sketches of imagination,
imagination, for madame Angerville guessed not the hidden care, the buried thorn, which preyed upon repose—she knew not the injuries of Hyacinthe, nor the tale af my own flight and my own debasement. Unlike her son, she vvould not have palliated a step so fla¬ grant—she would not have harboured a wretch so lost—she would have led me back to the path of virtue—she would have snatched me from the wiles of sin, even though my heart had broken in the renunciation—she woukl have paint¬ ed vice in its true colours, and chased away the false mists of delusion : un¬ tainted by the sophistry of the world, open, upright, ingenuous, she woukl have reproved in gentleness, and mourn¬ ed in sympathy. Just such a friend was she as the stricken mind covets—soft words mid mild remonstrance, probing deeper than angry disputation: she was the good, the beneficent Samaritan, pouring in oil and
and wine, leading to the shelter of her own dwelling, and healing with genuine conciliation. What thougii no stone marks her lowly grave—what though the nettle and the dank weed cluster over it—vvhat though the sod be trod¬ den, and the spot unknown ?—the last rays of the sun gild it vvith radiance— the first ravs of the sun exhale the dew ν »· ť gem of nature's tears—the eye of hea¬ ven beams upon* it, kn partiul» as on the mausoleum of princes, and the ceno¬ taph of heroes ! Would that my Eu¬ genia slept upon her bosom—that the same turf pressed upon them both— that the same shroud veiled them from mortal eye—that, united in death, I could mourn them witiiout bitterness, I could recall them without despair! Happy, thrice happy, is the mother who weeps o'er the grave of her child ! who, watching the last struggle of mor¬ tality, marks the emancipation of the cherub-spirit—traces the last convulsive quiver
quiver of life—hears the last moan of anguish—sees the livid features marble in -л smile ! Oh ! happy, thrice happy be she ! for certainty is bliss, compared to suspense and mystery. « * -# * *■ # A whole fortnight wore away, and liope yielded to inquietude. Each day did I watch the return ofthe messenger, and each day closed in gloom and dis¬ appointment ; fearful anticipations crowd¬ ed upon each other, and every rosy pic ture of felicity, every dawning promise of bliss faded. The lagging hours of my existence seemed marked with in¬ certitude—Fate herself seemed to con¬ spire against me, for peace smiled but in mockery. Madame Angerville tried to silence my complaints, to refute my murmurs— Alas ! she aimed the dagger where she thought to sooth.—" It is not for inno¬ cence to despair," she would exclaim: " trust'in the mercy of Heaven! It is thf-
the merited «troke alone whkh fails be¬ jond the power of healing г droop not, шу young friend-^be thè purity of your own heart a panacea to every iil." Ah me ! it was that heart from which I tried to shrink—that guilty, that be¬ guiling heart, whieh owned no hope be¬ yond the sin it cherished. Often, abash¬ ed and confounded, did I turn away my eyes-—often did I hang my head upon iny bosom, as though the burning blush of conviction would betray my secret. Sometimes, hurried away by my feel¬ ings» I bnged to precipitate myself at her feet» to acknowledge all my con¬ cealments, all my anguish; but the dread of losing De Beaufort ever with¬ held me—the misery of impeaching his honour ever sealed my lip& Then I was full of frailty—then 1 possessed riot courage to brave the ap¬ palling frown of virtne. Guised in the borrowed ι colouring of rønoeeneey I «hose on the ^narrow limit of human perception,
perception, forgetful that Heaven, pier¬ cing the inmost folds ofthe heart, stamps with a deeper dye the aggravating charge of hypocrisy. Then, how strange, how inexplicable was the inconsistency of roy feelings! Appreciating the excel¬ lency of my kind admonisher, shrink¬ ing at the enormity of roy own trans¬ gressions, often have I knelt—often sup¬ plicated a thorough change of heart- often earaestly prayed to bear some re* semblance to lier perfections! But to portray the flights of an imagination jaundiced hke roy own is a vain effort ; so varied, so rapid, so enthusiastic were the transitions, that the dream, of fe¬ vered delirium cannot mark a wilder field« · With a roind awed into that kind of passiveness which resembles composure, we retired for the night, madame An¬ gerville to repose—I to roy solitary charober, to reflect and weep., Lured by the bright effulgence of a cloud¬ less
lèás тоШ, Γ extìriguished rny light, and took iny station at thé window. Scarce dM' the balriry breath of May sigh in тЬе ! foHage—scarce did the Rhine's rip¬ pling current rhurniur the " death of sound ;" my eyes were fixed on the spot where I had last lost sight of De Beau- fort—my thoughts wandered back to him with thrilling, aching fondness; In a moment we were restored, as it Were, to each other; endearing recollect tions swelled my heart, and softened every pang of sorrow. Sighs and tears succeeded, but they were tears of ten¬ derness, not despair—tears which I would not have exchanged for all which social intercourse eould offer. Alone, unseen, unheard, wooing the balm of sensibi¬ lity, gratefully did I admit— " " There are woçs, Ill barter*d for ibe gar¡shiie¡.B of joy-" » . İ. A) » Quick was the charm dissolvecU-sud¬ den was the reverie broken: a forro, cautiously
cautiously emerging from the deep sha¬ dow of the sţurubbery, passed sjmSUy over the lawn ; it paused for a mo¬ ment, as though to note the dwelling; then proceeding, again shrunk into ob¬ scurity. I started—I bent forward ; every sense appeared to converge into one; roy eyes pierced amid the gloom, but the noc¬ turnal perambulator had vanished—not a leaf was stirring—not a sound to note the fall of footsteps. I was not superstitious, yet the hour and tiie circumstance combining, filled me with dismay. Sick with unspeak¬ able forebodings, breathless with fear and fancy, I clung to the frame of the window; I listened, but no sound reach¬ ed my ear—I tried to, persuade royself that what I had &een was the effect of imagination, but the noiseless advance of the intruder again stamped reality, speaking a conviction which my reason eould not disclaim. Steadfastly
1 Steadfastly I marked the figure ť the déguise left nought hut the height to oh^ervation---it was thick, it was im¬ penetrable : it could not be AngerviBe; «aM thy heart told me, De Beaufort would never steal like a midnight jMth- dfcrer'to the duelling of her he loted. Who therr could it be? No signal be- tfåryed hoètîlity— no lurking colleague intimated danger; it was evidently a mission of peace, for the stranger wan¬ dered round the chateau, without once seeking an entrance. When he paused beneath the win* döWÍ I shrunk away, fearftil of disco- ^ïy^when he retreated, I resumed roy station. Once I heard the murmur of his *Vöîce, but it was too indistinct to breirthe conviction : often was his hand pressed upon his forehead, and then again his arms were folded in that atti¬ tude which bespeaks abstraction and deep-tooteî eare. I Ыеа tø catch tbe outline of his wuntemnce, but, buried in
in the thick folda of his neckcloth, I could not trace a single feature. All wtó mystery and disguise—all was doubt and conjecture. Once he approached so neiar, that I fancied I could hear the laboured breath¬ ings of agitation; and then again hé fled, as thoúgb fearful of detection- fled from the silver rays of the moon* beams, and slunk within the darkened shadow of the portico. For two whole hours I continued to watch the perturbed wanderings of the Mni' nown ï an d not till I had traced him bevonU the kwn, not till long after I had lost him in distance, did I retire to my pillow. Tremblmg at every sound, starting at the loud tlirohbings of my own heart, I lay musing on tlie singularity of the occurrence. Sleep was frightened, fcr when exhausted nature sunk into forget· fulness the feverish doze wat every mo¬ ment troken by (bfcasms of tarrøtv Quiek was
was the mysterious stranger magnified into an armed force—the roar of mus¬ ketry, the groans of torture, the menace of destruction, succeeded, filling with horrors yet unknown. Grateful for the return of morning, I hailed with joy her saffron radiance; night's murky vapours scudded before her face, and the sun, rising in cloudless splendour, sipped dew from a thousand blossoms ! The woods reverberated the matin hymn of praise; all creation smiled, as thougii glorifying the birth of a new day! My faded cheek and rayless eye be¬ trayed the tale of inquietude and restless¬ ness ; madame Angerville eagerly ques¬ tioned, and listened with more tlian com¬ mon interest to my recital of the nighťs adventure : she started, as though a new light hatl dawned upon her; again and again did slie minutely inquire the height, the air, the dress of the stranger; and, almost unconscious of roy answers, her head
head supported by her hand, she seemed buried in deep thouglit*— € * For two whpje hours, say you? Ша he wander for two whole hours?" eagerly question¬ ed madame Angerville. " Would to Heaven I had seen him ! Surely dis¬ guise conld not have blinded my eyes— eould not have defied my penetration ! n Suddenly turning, and gazing intently on me—" Have you no possible suspi¬ cion ? * she continued—" does not limey recur to any individual?" " Oli no," I replied ; " my De Beau- ibrl İb ikr awav, nnã on whom else could mv fancy rent? Besides, he vvould not ha* e wandered in siienee and in mystery; he vvould have sprung to meet me—he would have called щюп roy name—he woukl iiave dissipated every fear and every sorrow—he------" " No, no, not De Beaufort," inter¬ rupting roe; " it could not be De Beau* fort, ««Does no suspicion lurk? Think VOL. IL Vf we Jl t
well, my young friend—does conjecture point to none other?" " In melancholy and in gloom, Anger¬ ville used to seek the ^mountain passes," I observed ; " but Angerville too is far distrnt—is with De Beaufort/' " I hope so—I trust so," said ma- dame Angerville, doubtfully ; " yet my r thoughts are wild and incongruous: Charles has long struggled vvith some hidden care—long has he misered the tale of sorrow, and shunned the aid and wishes of aflection ! I would have glean»- ed the story, but his confidence was shut against me! I besought it even with tears—yet stiil was it denied me !" " True; but vvhat have his conceal¬ ments to do with the stranger?" I in¬ terrogated. " What coincidence can be traced between last nighťs mysteries and the treasured secrets of Angerville?" " AVhat ifit be Charles himself?" ex¬ claimed madame Angerville, grasping my
my hand, and gazing on me vvith fear¬ ful trepidation. " Impossible," I articulated ; " Anger¬ ville flies not the post of duty." " The heart is sometimes treacherous," she resumed, vvith a heavy sigh : " alas ! his grief is deep and settled. I have thought—I do think------" and then she paused : then suddenly starting—" I too vvill watch to-night; and should the stranger again approach, I vvill address him—I will fearlessly question the pur¬ port of his mission." " We vvill watch together," I resumed: " if there be danger, vve vvill share it ; for my interest and my curiosity are alike excited." " Be it so," said madame Angerville, forcing a smile ; " vve will take our sta¬ tion at the window, and hail him at the first approach." But though she thus sought to rally her spirits, I read apprehension and doubt M 2 in
İn her expressive features; it was evi¬ dent some unacknowledged fe^r sossess¬ ed her mind ; for frequently did it betray itself by starts and inward shudderings: she hinted at the despotic power which passion assumes even over principle— spoke of it as destructive to honouiv as entailing on futurity tlie baleful poison of eternal remorse.—" Father of Hea¬ ven !" she ejaculated, " spare røe the misery of mourning tiie honour of my son! Rather let me know him num- bered with the brave and heroic dead, tlian living the dastardly slave of hh own feelings !" I took her hand—I would, in my turn, have remonstrated and consoled; but she restrained me,—"I cannot breathe what is passing in my heart," she con¬ tinued : " alas ! my suspicions are wild —may they prove groundless! This night—this very night, I trust, will bring conviction! There is but oiie stroke
stroke whieh my fortitude eannot meet ; you, Helena, are too innocent even to guess it." She turned from me—she wiped the swollen tear from her eye, then, w T ith forced composure, pursued—" To-night vve vvill watch together." We did watch—but we kept watch- in vain. The moon, rising in splendour, gilded the far-spreading landscape, yet no living objeet chequered her shadows ; no sound, save the low sighing of the breeze and the rippling current of the river, broke upon the stillness. " He comes not," whispered madame Angerville, " and another age of sus¬ pense awaits me. Oh that I had been here last night, for my boding heart tells me it was Charles !" Towards morning, chilled and disap¬ pointed, vve retired to our pillows. The next night, and the next night, we alternately kept our station at the window : but still the stranger appeared 31 2 not ;
not ; and, fatigued and disconcerted, wr relinquished the tedious vigil Madame Angerville smothered her suspicions m her Own breast ; and J, praying for the safety, and anticipating the return of De Beaufort,, goon bauished the occur¬ rence from memory. A week of sameness succeeded—I can¬ not call it a week of peace,, and yet it was the bst week in which my tortured heart e'er dreamt the dream of hope We were walking on the lawn ; madame «Angerville held my Eugenia in her arms, and I, exciting her smiles and her atten¬ tion, was sporting playfully around her —now hiding royself among the sliruhs, now darting out in tender dalliance: full of happiness and life* roy darling crowed with pleasure; now slie hid*her faeee in the bosonnfe öf madame Angerville^ and now, springing with glee«, she extended her arrast towards, me. God of Omnipo¬ tence 1 imm deep Ь thepktureiregistered ì 1er eye of foe» her cheek of blooro, her smile
mail® ôf sw^tnèAs! in thé gravo alone ean it be ^Faeed-*irt the grave*, wherem all things are forgotten t I turned at an approaching sound % a man on horseback was advancing towards us í quick ш elec¬ tric thought* a thousand shapeless fan¬ cies rose ; my heart beat high —I snatch^ ed the arm of my friend—I pointed to the messenger, and then I flew fo the gate, and extended my hand, long, long before he had reaehed it. I eould not speak ; my eyes were fixed on his face*— my bosom heaved with painful pertur¬ bation. " For madame Angervffle," he ex¬ claimed, extending a letter. ? " Not one for me?" I faltered—** not one forme?" The man passed on, and the next Шо* ment madame Angerville was at my side,—** We will return fe> the house," she exclaimed, taking the fetter* " No, no—read it, in tóefeyT I itti* plorèâ,
plored, pressing both hands upon roy heart, atid gasping for breath. ^ Read i%) tfýonvulise ftıy senses!" Eugenia smiled: she stretched forth lier tender arms, but I dared not take her—she sprung to meet me, but even her infant claims were lost. Agonized, tortured, I could scarcely support my¬ self; I tottered by the side of madame Angerville, beseeching her, with almost maddened energy, to read the letter.— " More than Hfe is in the page," I arti¬ culated. " My brain is on fire—rack me no longer; break the seal, and tell me of De Beaufort!" Still was she deaf to my prayers—still did she firmly resist all roy entreaties ; and not till we had gained the parlour— not till she had resigned her unconscious charge, did she once attempt its perusal. I watched her countenance^—I saw her lip tremble—I read roy fate in the ashy hue of her eheek ! I could not ask—I eould
could not b-çeatlıe one single syllable: frantic—desperate—dreading, yet daring the worst, with a wild spring I snatched the ratal letter from her hand, and the next moment stretched me hfeless at her feet í
UND OF VOL. ÍL
Prutte«! by J. Darling, JUadeubaíl-Stniet, «LüX.rion.
