Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The nun of Santa Maria di Tindaro: a tale
ΊΗΕ
NUN SANTA MARIA Dl TINDARO.
CHAPTER I.
*' Be action amenable to conscience ! Conscience, criterion of each n orldly deed ; In oue the spu the curb of шап'ь most deep, Most secret darings." J S it chance, or sorrow, or calamity, or the waywardness of fortune, which hither tends thy footsteps? Is it the ingratitude of man, or is it the mere ea* price of thy owrn feelings ? Stranger, tarry ere the seal of fete becomes affix* ed ; reflect, pause o'er the day-dream of vol. L в thy
thy Hfe ; recai the vicissitudes, the er¬ rors, the sins, of thy mortal pilgrimage; tli ve neath eaeh secret action, sift each untoward thought ; let example yield no palliative, or casualty beguile with trea¬ cherous extenuation. Born alike with the powers of discernment, gifted from above with the grace of reason, folly should deter, not allure—vice should disgust, not convict. Stranger, if chance con¬ ducted to thfe seclusion, if tliy sojourn¬ ment be short, if thy worldly ties be im¬ pulsive, read my story—muse upon the grave whieii presses щюп my novv ach¬ ing heart : if justice freezes not the tear of pity, give it to my sufferings, and j nay eternal mercy hallow the sigh of boft compassion ! Remember, temptation waylays; remember, deceit stole even midst the bovvers of paradise, and blast¬ ed the hopes of' man ; remember—shun the quicksands which entombed my in¬ nocence, which beguile tiie iootsteps of youtb, of beauty—which end in ruin» in
in disgrace, in shame. If sorrow drove thee from the haunts of thy fellow-be¬ ings, bow submissive to the divine will ; for the season of mourning passed away, the hours of cheerfulness re-dawn. If calamity be tbe heavy draught on peace, here seek a resting-place ; or if to tbe waywardness of fortune be tby drooping spirit ascribed, reason wills the same an¬ tidote. The caprice of feeling, too, may be subdued—the influence of reHgion calm the turbulent throes of envy or of passion—ail, all, save ingratitude : if ingratitude be the sting of life, philoso¬ phy's self ean award no panacea; in¬ gratitude inflicts «τ ivound ivhich cannot be healed, a gangrene which eternally festers. Stranger, if tbou be innocent, so once was I ; if tbou be happy, I too eould boast that blessing ; if thou be proud in tby ovvn strength, I, too, trusted and was lost : be beauty, be power, tby stay, know tliat the one is a fading flower, η ΰ tlic
the other but the pageant ofa day. Let Fancy pierce the grave's limitation—let her dive beneath the marble which hides my mouldering dust Stranger, pic¬ ture Grace in her fairest proportion ; pic¬ ture Beauty in her most dazzling lure: let imagination conjure the form majes¬ tic, tbe skin of snow, the eye of diamond lustre, the hair of Ethiopian blackness, the teeth of pearl, the lips of corai, the clieeks of pt aeh) down. Stranger, pause upon the p ha n ton ι of a moment : sueh, such was Helena —as fair, as transient, gay, perishable as the epheineron of a summers ьку —Helena, the mouldering tenant of a narrow grave, the lost, the dropping victim of fallacious sin—Hde¬ na, the oi.ce-despairing sbter of Tin¬ daro—HcLna, who lived in penance to die in hope. Stranger, raise the veil— behold her as she İs; maik well the prize of beauty; the cheeks sunk, the eyes ray ksi, the roses faded, the lilies fiüd. Nay, shrink not fiom the view; ·* * thou
fhou too art hastening to the same sanctuary, for each breath, shortening the span of life, leads to the trance tbou art umv contemplating ; thou too must lose the due proportion, the flexile form, the spring of youth, the eharm of beau¬ ty ; thou too must exchange the eoil of flesh, for the lauk jaw, tbe ghastly soc¬ kets, ofa haggard skeleton ! Stranger, wliat are the boasted powers of the great, the pageantry of state, the pre-eminence of pride, the gilded lure of richer and all the earthly dross whieii man dares value? what but illusion. the short, the flitting period of our lie¬ ing? The worm banquets on the mo¬ narch as the beggar—tlie earth enwraps the oppressor and the oppressed. Stranger, fly tho worl «d's witcheries, spurn pleasure's false débitons : Hke fieri* meteor tlu v (fort ir»«on the svht ; they waylay the prirviples, tbey eon- found tlie judgment íLy coi rupt the в 3 hem*.
heart Remember, in the balance wíáh eternity, life is as a cup of water min^ gied with the ocean's mighty vyaves-— is as an impression upon the sands, whieh the coming tide effaces. Sift thou tbe inward impulse, the hidden motive,. of thy seeret actions ; extract the embryo* sin—let not the seed engender : thy hand may snap the scion, but the grown tree, deep-rooted, mock» all thy pigmy strength. Stranger, from the grave I warn thee—the grave, whare sophistry forgets to eharm, where viee foigets to lure. Divorce thy thoughts from man, mortify the vagrant faneies of thy na¬ ture, forswear the gaudy tinsel, the vain pride, the empty shadoivs, the guileful snares of an illusive world ; revise the past, redeem thy misspent hours. Stran¬ ger, in the drear aisles, in the lone cells, in the cloisteral seclusion of Santa Maria di Tindaro, leam that man's best esti¬ mate is virtue—man's firmest bulwark the
tiıe meek humiHty of pious feith-^maiVs just pride äie inborn consciousness; of integrity.
CHAPTEH II.
SvrmT were the ïosesef promise, gay and vivid the tints whieh gilded tiie spring of my existence! A mother's bosom pillowed my infancy—a father's strength upheld my inexperience; no secret corroding care banquetted on the roses of my cheek— no forebodings of coming ill froze the bland smile of inno¬ cence; content tenanted our dwelling, love scoffed at tbe lack of luxury, bealtb glowed in the mountain-breeze, and re¬ jiose gladdened the eve of labour. It was in one of those rieb and lux¬ uriant val leys with which nature has pro¬ fusely scattered tbe Sici Han coast, that my n 4 father
gles to repress her tears. My feelings caught the alarm ; swayed by the wann impulse of youth, I viewed the stranger as an enemy, and though my memory registered the title and tbe name of C/mteauroUiV, for safety I crept closer to the side of my father. In vain the stranger tried to allure me ; in vain he held out his band, and invited me by the most endearing appellations : I shook my dark locks over my face, and bent my head upon my bosom. 44 Is mademoiselle de Chateauroux al¬ ways so shy ?" asked the stranger. Mv mother hesitated·—my fathei* a. V frowned.— ,4 Helena Älontcalm knows how to estimate the friends of her pa¬ rents/' he eoìdly replied. 44 Helena Montcalm !" echoed the stranger. 4 * Your pardon, marquis ; the strong resemblance—the—the—" hesi¬ tating. " Fancy/' with an arch smile, " pictured this little angel your daugh¬ ter/' *· Fancy
44 Fancy is often impertinently intru¬ sive," coldly remarked my father; and then, again yielding to taciturnity, he wrapt bimself in the cold repellant gloom of his own thoughts, The stranger appeared not to notice bis abstraction ; he addressed himself to my mother, and dwelt on the pictu¬ resque beauties of Sicily with all the enthusiasm of a young and glowing ar¬ tist Copious indeed was the field, for nature boasts ï ot a richer trarner, man wooes not a brighter epitome of para¬ dise. The verdure of eternal spring spreads beneath a genial sky ; tbe mel¬ lowing burnish of summer courts the eye in a thousand variations: fruits and blossoms hang pendent on the same bough, and tbe fresh soft breezes of the Mediterranean, rifling the ho,ird of sweets, emit a universal fragrance. The stranger paused ; be pointed to the gradually sit »ping sides of the moun¬ tains, to the waving jasturo, to tlie lì 6 teeiiiiuir
teeming vineyards.—" Are you a native of this second Eden ?" he inquired ; *· for here in security and happiness you may smile at the storms of a perturbed world. AVhat more need man desire? what be¬ vind ean his heart crave?*' His eyes rested on the perfect features of my mother, but my father read not the glance, and I was too young to de¬ cipher it At length we reached the path, which winding up the steep, led to our own dwelling ; it was nanow and curved, fringed with a thousand blossoms, and commanding the wavv mirror of the San Angelo. At tbe wicker gate open¬ ing to our garden, my father paused : lie placed Jiis hand upon the latch ; he turned t? the stranger.—* r Accident has betrayed the retreat policy has chosen," be exclaimed, ¥i Mark me, De Beau¬ fort : in this valley I am known by the name of Montcalm ; breathe within this valley the паше vrh ich Montcalm con¬ ceals,
ceais, and you drive me and mine, beings dearer, far dearer than my life, to seek a new asy bim." De Beaufort laid his spread hand up¬ on his heart ; he followed into the cot¬ tage, and when ihe door was closed— " Sacred be your secret," be replied. ·· AA'hcther beneatli the bumble appella¬ tion of Montcalm, or the titled distinc¬ tion of Chateauroux, suffer me to call vou friend." *" Friend Γ echoed my father, and rVom that hour De Beaufort found wel¬ come beneath our roof. Weeks wore away, and De Beaufort was a constant ν isitor : lie sojourned in tîie overhang¬ 's ig fortress de Brolo, and eaeh day did !æ descend into the valley. Alas! my infatuated mother saw not the snare until she became entangled; my father dreamt not of danger until the power to elude was passed. Never, never shali I forget the burn¬ ing tear whieh fell upon my cheek, when.
when, for the last time. I was pressed to a mother's bosom ; never, never the groan of anguish whieh almost rent my fathers heart, when, awakening from tbe long trance of confidence, he found his home desolate. Beauteous as the fabled houris of a brighter world was my ill-starred mother : inexperienced to eveiy guileful art, sensitive to every fu¬ gitive impression, gratitude, fatally mis¬ taken for love, was the bond whieh had stolen her virgin vows. Vor her had my father sacrificed every proud distinc¬ tion—fortune, familv, name—all. dl, to the romantic, tbe propelling Influence 4 of passion. Rieh in innocence, possess¬ ing the idol of his heart's worship, not fbr a diadem would he have exc h anced his lot. He Ind fled the circles of the great—he had sought forper.ee in medi¬ ocrity ; my mother smiled upon his solici- tude^and be knew not a hope beyond. Gradual was the work of destruction, slow the poison which sapped the virtue
of the heart; my mother started not from the insidious whispers of flattery, ueither did she withdraw her hand írom the stolen pressure of presumption ; friendship was the ready mask of simu¬ lation, and mv outraged, my betrayed father, marked not tbe gathering storm. I cannot, I dare not note the gradations of fascination, the palpable blush, the fluttering half-repressed sigh, Alas ! the tempter was armed for conquest and the tempted too weak to fly tbe mad¬ dening torrent of passion. Often would De Beaufort snort witb me upon the 1 4L enamelled lawn : eften díase mc amidst the roman tii interstices of tlio neigh¬ bouring upland ; tlien, culling tbo rich¬ est blossoms, would he bring his offer¬ ing to my moiher, and smile at tbe ready hand wlueh scattered those blos¬ soms amid the glossv curls of ber raven bair. Memorv is too elear, too compre¬ hensive; eaeh tear, each s'gb, ean I now resolve
resolve—eaeh fatal indication of criminal indulgence. Time imperceptibly wore away ; the mellowing tints of autumn superseded the ridi burnish of summer, and the labours of industry garnered the teem- ing harvest of nature. My father, for¬ getful of his dreams of splendour, pining but for the wdlbeing of her to ivhom those dreams of splendour were sacri¬ ficed, tarried with bis labourers in tbe vineyard. ¡My mother—oh God ! she was my mother ; and be the hist prayer which quivers on my lip a petition for her pardon ! I knevv not why, but my mother had beeome unusually thought- ful : cold even to mv caresses, the pallid hue of her cheek coloured the plea of mibpoMtion ; and my father, sensitive as the verdant leaf whieh closes at the touch, watdied eaeh variation, and smil¬ ed even at the petulance of his hearts idol. It
lt was in the evening of tbe day in which my father journeyed to tbe Httle town of Tripi, to p'roeure some coveted luxury for the invalid, that, missing my mother, I sought her in the garden. Lightly 1 flew tiirough the covered vvay leading to the gloomy arbour \\ hich ever lured her footsteps. It overhung the bed of the river, pendent as an eagle's nest, and closely mantled with luxuriant shrubs, looking as though a thousand blossoms glowed upon one ->tcm. A deep sob checked my progress —I beard the low murmurs of my mo¬ ther, ai.d yet I dared to listen. The i.eeeiits vvere smothered, but the word ingratitude was distinct—it fell like a bolt oť ice upon my young heart ; and when, stealing forward, I saw her head reclining on the shoulder of De Beau¬ fort, his arm encircling her waist, and his lips pressed upon her forehead, I vshrieked out ·* my faiher!" and the next instant si ood shuddering at their side. Even
Even af this distant period, amid a doiafer's gloom, within thie hallowed ееЩ does the travzied glance of my mo¬ ther pursue me, when half-fkinting, halt dying, she spurned* me from her feet— she breathed tlie hasiy curse which her transgression аюле extorteé* Long wa» it ere the sopiiistiy ef De Beaufort eould restore composure, ere my misguided mother could strengtlwen his sctbterftige by pleading indisposition, and thanking him ibr his support; nay, even then I was too young to decipher their ex¬ changed glance; and cheeking the al¬ most shapeless fears which bad sprung tip in my bosotn, I clung to her hand, and returned with her to the cottage. Those little doubts, which inexperience could scarcely simpe, vanished in the presence of my father : my mother rmiled, and his features glowed with joy and peace. Transient was the dream of happiness: Hke the undulating calm of the ocean, it served but to shew tbe storm
storm more terrible. Exiled from the circle of home, and living in disguise and mystery, my unsuspecting father was the sport of eadi coming accident. Panting to be reinstated in the favour he had forfeited, he clung to eaeh chi¬ merical change, mid became the ready dupe of treachery and designing poKey. A letter, couched in terms equivocai ñnd mysterious, lured him from toss so- Htude : it was not the hope of grandeur, it was the award of a parenťs blessing he craved ; and whilst he journeyed to Palermo, whilst lie yielded to the wild latitude of sanguine anticipation, the deep, tbe unprindpled, the selfish De Beaufort was aiming the total overthrow of every earthly promise.
CHAP-
CHAPTER III.
Dismissed with the maternal kiss, every infant care had long been hushed to rest, when I was awakened by a murmuring sob, and starting from my pillow, I be¬ laid my mother bending over me. Al¬ though the misty grey of morning pe¬ netrated the chamber, she was dressed as when vve parted the preceding night. Her tears streamed upon my cheek, and when 1 raised my band to chuse tbem, sbe wildly vvithhdd it, articulating— ** Forbear, ehildi tbey are tbe last tears with which a mother will imbrue you/' I guessed not tiie force of her expression; yet 1 folded my arms aroimd her neek, and offered every endearment which na- ti^re and affection could suggest Sbe clasped me to lier bosom·—sbe sobbed as though
though ber heart was bursting; and vvhen I asked her why she wept, she shuddered, as thougb struck by a mortal palsy, turned away her head, but sjioke not A sound from the garden suddenly aroused her attention ; she started, and a momentary crimson flushed her pale cheek. Again the sound was repeated, and again she started in horror, then wildly straining me in her arms, she kissed my lips and forehead, and bidding me go to sleep, stole out of the chamber. 1 did go to sleep, and I awoke but to witness consternation and dismay. My mother was nowhere to be found ; her apartment was deserted, her pillow un- pressed. A letter lay upon the table; it was addressed to rø v father: my fether ivas absent, and the servants gazed m wonder on each other. In the evening my father returned to the cottage; his eyes glowed with expectation and de¬ light , he asked fbr his Helena—but no tongue could tell the story. Silence and
mnd gloom fell cold upon his heart ; ap¬ prehension was awakened ; and when to his anxious interrogations the tmth was revealed, when his hand grasped tbe fatal letter, dreadful was the burst of his indignation—deep the pressure of cor¬ roding grief. For days he spoke not—ftar weeks, fbr months, for years, he knew not how te «mite; for, aks! fi«, this eventful ,ρβ- riod, be Hved bait the wreck of his former mif. Shrinking from hisfelfow-creatures, äs though treachery stalked in the shape of man, he buried himself in obscurity, he renounced aH commerce with tbe world: but for me, every genial spring Imd been frozen—but for me, nature had died within him ; I was the tie which lured him from misanthropy. Some¬ times he woidd gaze on me till softened to weeping; then throw me suddenly from him, as though the breathing epi¬ tome of my mother was gall to bis feel¬ ing ; then again he would hide me in
bis bosom, call me the sok remnant of his happiness, and vow to live but to watch over and to guard me. Diligent in the cultivation of my mind, every care seemed absorbed in one ; he watdi¬ ed each expansion of inteUect, and glo¬ ried in every refulgent beam of genius. 1 was bis pupil, his friend, his compa¬ nion; for me did be retrace the imrieate paths of science, and sift the elaborate page of wisdom's lore—«for me did be struggle 'gainst a hoard of buried grief —for me did he smile, even when hk heart was breaking. It was in tlie evening ofmy sixteenth anniversary, whai, like a budding roset, I was ope ning on the day, that my fa- tlier, combating with lw fedings, led me to ibe onee-eherished haunt of my lost mother. It was a retreat he had forsaken—a retreat untrodden by him for six long years. I gazed with sad¬ dened astonishment as lie toiled up the steep, and when I traced the starting tear
tear щюп bis cheek, I would have tnriv *ed him aside: but he wltliheld me. » *? What tiiough I probe m w s heart," he articulated, " ivhat though I live wounds whkh have never healed, secon¬ dary should be the feeHngs of self, when ¿n, competi tion with a child's welfare," My hand was U eked in his, its his eyes wildly wandered o'er imy features; my sobs echoed his, as he led towards the ar¬ bour. Tlie golden burnish of a setting sun glowed upon our path; the giant rock had caught tbe bright suffusion, and now seemed tipped with radiance ; eadi waving blossom beamed a more vivid tint, each clustering shrub emitted a sweeter odour ; Hke sheets of liquid silver, the San Angelo glided below, catching the «oft redundance *>f the landscape, swelling the reflected amphi¬ theatre of o'ertopping mountains. Yet my father heeded not the riches of cre¬ ation : steeled against every extern 1 beauty* that mine of care which bad deh ed
åeåvedéeepfcrmws on hk open forehead* whkh had withered Ae roses of health, and poisoned the balm of slumber, ab¬ sorbed each faculty, chaining hts mind md spirits alike in bondage. He threw himself on the spot on which I had be¬ held my mother redinnig on the shoulder of De Beaufort; he pointed to the seat beside him, and then with his hands clasped, and his face almost buried in his bosom, he seemed internally to struggle with contending feelings. * 6 Hdena," he at lengtii said, gazing mournfully on me, " tax every power ofyour mind, and tell me, in your sliort life, how many past years memory шп recai?" " How many years, my father ?" * € Yes;" he resumed, witìi a İRîavy sigh, * ť and recai also the events which have stamped those years memorable." I hesitated**"! trembled—-I knew not wimt to say, for, ahs ! every event in my uajs of infency teemed witii the image VOL. I. С Of
ofmy mother; her caresses and her cares were the first, the indelible records of nature. 44 You will not wound me, Helena," pursued my father, deciphering at once tbe cause of my hesitation ; 44 recollec¬ tion encompasses all, even from the hour in which your eyes first opened to the light of heaven. Speak then, my child, and tell me the earliest dawnings of me¬ mory." Still, still I could not pronounce tbe name which hung upon my lips ; I raised my eyes imploringly to his face, and be¬ held bis, in tempered sadness and resig¬ nation, fixed upon me. 44 Helena," he pursued, touching the spring "of a miniature-case he had taken from bis pocket, " know you these fea¬ tures?" 44 My mother !" I exclaimed, and tears of gitterest anguish streamed down my cheeks. I snatched it from his hand— I ivould
I would have pressed it to my lips; but he withheld me. 44 No," he faltered, ** not even to the painted image must your pure lips be pressed. Once I worshipped that image —once I ivould have taught you to bless, almost to adore it ; but the angel semblance fled, and vice and ingratitude poisoned all reliance. The original of this iňfiagé, Helena, lured me from all that youth and gay ambition e'er could picture brilliant; lured me from home, from kindred; banished me a parenťs arms ; then abandoning the paradise her charms created, rendered every hope nu¬ gatory, eveiy scene desolate. Ah, my child, let a mother's crimes, let a father s sad experience, w r am you from a fate so untoward! Your mother was blinded by sordid interest—I by headlong pas¬ sion ; your mother believed cold duty an insuperable barrier to vice—I fancied love the surest, brightest balm to sublu¬ nary w f oe; your mother knew my rank, с 2 yet
yet she consented with me to share ob¬ scurity—I blessed that consent, as a true, an incontestible proof of genuine affec¬ tion. Blinded by self-love, I believed I was to her what she was to me—the world ; and when we sought this valley, tiiough under tbe doud of disguise and mystery, not with the greatest potentate on earth would I have changed my lot You are now my world, Helena," and he clasped me more closely to him.— ** Answer me, girl—know you the charge of a father's peace ?" ** Yes, yes, my injured father," I arti¬ culated, 4< and the study of my whole life shall be to prove that knowiedge. Bound to you by every law of gratitude and affection, never------" 44 Beware, child!" interrupting me; *' promise not too highly, lest you should forget your vow. AAlien your mother forsook the home of her childhood," and his features assumed a sternness foreign to» their native expression, " she cozened me
me with vows of the same import Oh I may curses light on the head of De Beaufort ! may his visions of felicity be blasted ! may his last hour of expiring life be as rayless, as desolate, as he lias made my prospect!" I shuddered—I dared to cast even on my father a look of reprehension, and though he was racked, almost convulsed ivith the pressure of his feelings, yet did he decipher tbat look. 4i You would tell me the rancour of my lieart is unchristianlike," he resumed; " vou would preach the stale precept of good for evil ; you would bid me bless the blaster ofmy honour, the relentless, cold-blooded villain, who, under the guise of friendship, sapped, undermined the purity of her I bad pictured pure. Hear me, Helena !" and he eyed me with a look almost petrifying, " if, in your future intercourse vvith man, you should liold commune with De Beaufort, or with a descendant of De Beaufort, с iî recai
recai this liour, for my curse will rest alike on you/' 1 know not what dire foreboding as¬ sailed my heart; but the threatened ana¬ thema of my father, fidi ing like an iee- bolt, chased every vestige of colour from my cheek, and bent me almost fainting upon his shoulder. He shrunk from me, unmindful of his native tenderness— he saw me gasp for breath, without onee whispering pity or assurance; wonder and alarm superseded every otlier sensa¬ tion, and when my eyes met his, his face was as bleached as my own. 4k Tell me, Helena," be exclaimed. " and tell me as your soul hopes ibr sal¬ vation, wben, and vvhcre, and hovv you have known De Beaufort ?" " Since tbe fatal hour of my mothers flight, ϊ have never beheld De Beau¬ fort/' I replied. * 4 Fear not, my father; the offspring of him he has injured would be as a basilisk to his eye." My father shook his head—" You know
know not the world—vou know not the depravity ofour species. Alas! there is no barrier which uncurbed passion will not surmount." * 4 Then am I safe," I exclaimed, in tbe impulsive magic of simplicity, " for passion must succeed offence." Even in a moment Hke tbis, my father could not refrain a smile ; be threw bis arm fondly around me—he kissed my forehead, then quiek resuming all his seriousness—** Helena," he pursued, 4< it is not the mere ebullition of anger I ivould elicit—it is not that noisy pa¬ roxysm of rage, whicb, Hke tbe gathering tempest, bursts and spends its fury—Ob no !" shuddering, * 4 it is tbat blast, that mildew to peace, that mad intemperate passion, vvhich, falsely denominated love, oft dooms its hapless object to shame, privation, endurance, and death," 44 Love, my father," interrupting him, 44 in a retirement like ours ? why warn me against love?" с 4 ** Retirement
** Ketirement is the nurse of passion," replkd my father. " Alas î in this deep, this secluded retirement, a serpent coiled aroimd your mother's heart, and stung her honour ; in tins retirement, guarded, hemmed round by a husband's arms, the spoiler eame, rioted, triumphed over faith and worldly bonds. Helena— child—daughter of this being, this* wo¬ man loved even in pollution," and again pressing the spring, be held to view tb* faultless features of my mother, " marlt vvell this image, this Seraph smile, this look of innocence, then tdl me, have I not cause to hate, to curse my fellow- men?—to su speet treachery in every glance, deceit in every protestation ?" 44 Is it just, is it right," I timidly ask¬ ed, " to weigh the wiiole world by one standard ? Does not the human heart vary as the human countenance ?" 44 The human heart varies hut in the gradations of vice," rejoined my father; 44 man is alike prone to selfishness and imperfection.
imperfection. If you would be happy, chaste, humble, good, live like the rose in the desart, spend your sweetness, ana die unknown/* 44 Alas î my father," I articulated, witii a half-drawn sigh, 4i what a picture would you sketeh of happiness !" 44 AVith you, Helena," he mournfully replied, " independent of man—with man independent of woman. Be tbe heart once inveigled, and happiness is lost; bc tbe judgment onee hood¬ winked, and what security have we for conduct ? Till I beheld your mother, I was free, unshackled, Hght as morning ether ; wiien I beheld your mother, she became my fate; listlessness, languor» dejection succeeded ; for her cottage, the palace of my father was abjured; and how am I rewarded ? my couch steeped in bitterness, my years given to sorrow. Helena," grasping my hand, and gazing on me wich an expression never to be forgotten, 4t give not reins to imagiua- c 5 tion,
tion, neither suffer the deceptions of na¬ ture to seduce your heart. Gay as the spring-bedecking blossoms is the season of youth ; let that season be mellowed by example and precept : remember a father's tortured heart clings to you as its last hope. If iu this solitude the sport of evil destiny should assail you vvith temptation, recai the fate of your mother; picture a De Beaufort in even the shadow of an intruder; and vvhen you liend your knee in prayer, pray for strength to shun the wiles of man." I shuddered as I marked the flushed cheek and sparkling eye of this new- created misanthropist, and reading a stem and fatal law in his fresh moulded caprice, I strove at once, if not to con¬ vict, at least to assail his feeHngs.—" Be¬ hold me," I exclaimed, vainly struggling for calmness, *' unknowing and unknown, toiling up the steep and rugged path vour caution would direct Perhaps whilst yct iife teemed with a thousand all u re: nen ts.
allurements, my only reliance snatched from me, my friend, my counsellor, my all, my fether—where then could I turn? —wbere seek a compassionating hand to staunch my tears ?" * 4 There" said my father, pointing upwards, * 4 fbr Iieaven is tbe only reli¬ ance of innocence. Should it prove so, my child, tarrv not to water the síkí whkh closes upon my ashes, but fly to the altar ofyour God ; fly and beeome a candidate for Heaven, beneath tbe hum¬ ble garb of the pious sisterhood of Santa Maria di Tindaro/' Gracious Heaven î how did my heart droop within me at the prospect of tbis living death ! At the bare mention of such a seclusion, 1 forgot tbe sufferings* of my father—I forgot the ingratitude which had dashed bis cup with gall; and as my trembling lips echoed, " San¬ ta Maria di Tindaro!" I dared mentally to tax him with cruelty and injustice, ** Yes, to the saeied altar of Santa с 0 Maria
Muría di Tindaro," resumed my father, unmindful of my emotion. ** There, in a life of true holiness, unassailed by temptation, unvitiated by example, you may pray for one stray soul—for one who needs all your prayers; pray for her hour of repentance—pray for her bour of conviction. Life is at best pre¬ carious : remember, Helena, should the sleep of death steal unwarned upon my senses ; should I be snatched from you unprepared and unhidden, to tihe clois¬ ter of Santa Maria ài Tindaro my flit¬ ting spirit ivould point Deceived, be¬ trayed, abused as I have been in my intereourse with the world, to see you its inaugurated sister, to know your in¬ nocence, and youi youth, shrouded in the veil of perpetual seclusion, is all that my heart craves of peace." I gazed mournfully on my father; my eyes filled with tears, imd a cold shuddering crept over my frame: the raipbow visions of youth seemed to fade, and
and every rich and glowing tint to set in darkness : pride and buoyant expecta¬ tion spurned at the meek humility of profession; and memory, revising the* field of infant speculation, without cau¬ tion, without thought, I pronounced the name once uttered bv De Beaufort, tlio * ** high and sounding title of marquis cfe Chateauroux. Had a poniard drank tiie life's blood of my fetlier, his start muld not have been more palsied : he gazed on me with amazement and dis¬ may, then suddenly recovermg his self- command—" AVbat mean you, Helena?" h** demanded ; " where, in this valley, I we you known De Chateauroux?" I was abashed, confounded ; my eyes were bent upon the earth, md my dieeks dyedin crimson. 44 Explain," continued my father, re¬ gardless of my confusion* " answer me, where have you seen De Chateauroux?" " Нете^е -now," I articulated, ** for is not
not Montcalm—is not my father—is not De Chateauroux one ?" The pause was deep ; my father bit his lip—he pressed his hand upon his forehead—he seemed to commune within himself; then with a half-drawn, half- smothered sigh, he said—" Be it so, Helena; but bow came the secret re- veakd ?" Again did the painful task devolve on me to reeal the introduction of De Beaufort, and again did revenge and hatred harass tbe perturbed spirit of my fetber. " 'Tis true, too true," he at length exclaimed : " in the workl I am the mar¬ quis de Chateauroux; but I have re¬ nounced the ivorld, I have forsworn all its vain, all its empty distinctions. Love ¡minted to obscurity, and to elude an incensed parenťs seardi, to possess the idol of my infatuated worship, I ex¬ changed the proud distinction of Cha¬ teauroux,
teauroux, for the unknown, untitled Montcalm. Had your mother lived for me, had she breathed but a wish for splendour uud homage, the season of seclusion bad been temporary. I loved, her—God of Nature ! loved is too feint a term: the very earth upon which sbe trod was precious to me; tbe very air she inhaled balmy as the breath of Hea¬ ven : her wish was my law, her comfort my Mirety for happiness ; for never bigot more idolized his saint, never burnt with more ardent zeal. Had she been grate¬ ful—had she worn but the semblance of love—had sbe------Alas! lis vain—her vices have poisoned the world, and I Hv e now but to guard her offspring from those snares by which she became en-, tingled. Helena—child of her I can¬ not bate—bury tbe knowledge deep in your own bosom : build not on the pride of ancestry ; forget it, abjure it, banish it as an idle dream, as a vain and flitting mockery. Be content to share the cho¬ sen
sen destiny of your fether ; curb each untoward thought, each wayward fancy ; breathe not the name of Chateauroux : whilst I live, be our cottage the boun¬ dary of your wishes, and when I die, as the sole and solitary remnant of Mont- calm, fly to the protecting walls of Santa Maria di Tindaro." " Yet, my father," I articulated, catching to the last faint glimmer of hope, *' if my heart should forswear the railing, if instead of the meek humility of devotion, it should pant high for the enjoyment of social iife, tell me, would it not be profanation to offer at the high altar of Heaven an unwilling sacrifice? If I should feel-—if I should own—if— i f -- ..... ■ ■ " I hesitated. ** Proceed," said my father. " Tell me, Helena, educated as you have been, ivhat can you feel ?—iv hat can you own ?" ** If I should fed," I rejoined, scarce daring to raise my eyes from the earth, ·* that the Creator framed not his crea¬ tures
tures for immolation —if nature should war against the soul—if otiier duties, other claimants should weaken the call of holiness, would it not be virtue to swerve from the track you would direct?** 41 Helena," said my fether, in accents mournfuHy impressive, 44 since the fetal hour of your mother's flight, no human being, save ourselves and our necessary domestics, have darkened the threshold ofour dwelling; how then have the seeds of rebellion been engendered ?— where have they been nurtured, that they should threaten to spring up små dicke the play of reason ?" 4 * Here," laying my spread hand upon my heart, 4fc here, my father, for every feeling of my nature wars against the blank of profession." I dared to raise my eyes to his fece, nor did I shrink, although I read dis¬ pleasure : it was the moment pregnant with my fate, and bending my knee be¬ fore him, and dasping my hands in söp- plication
plication—* 4 Father," I implored, " rear me not for a destiny so inauspicious." He spoke not; but I felt his warm tears upon my face as he attempted to raise me; and when I resisted the weak efforts of his trembling band—when re- taining my station, I dung to bim as to the last stav of mv strength—ivhen I petitioned but fcr Hberty of choice, be bid rne cease as I valued bis senses. Every feature seemed convulsed—every pow f er suspended—the swollen catalogue of ills pressed upon his brain, and gasp¬ ing for breath, he sank upon tbe arm of the bench. Terrified at what I had done, I sprang from my knees, panting to sooth and to reassure him—I placed bis head upon my bosom—I bared his forehead to the breeze—I chaffed his hands and his tem¬ ples, and in all the warm energy of my nature, besought bim to be composed, to do with me what he pleased. The dread of profession vanished before the dread
dread of a fathers danger; and bad the saered veil shadowed my temples, bad it hung as a pall upon my bier, I should liave bent a lowly and a ready sacrifiée. Rapid almost as thought did the for¬ titude and self-influence of my father return : for the present he bid me ba¬ nish the subject : be said it was by rea¬ son, not feeling, he wished to convict ; that I was hurried away by a false me¬ dium ; tbat I saw and judged with the hasty decision of inexperience ; and that he doubted not, wben the maturing hand of time had mellowed my feelings into rationality, I too should stamp tiie world in the selfsame estimate : and then he varied the discourse, and bidding me banish the infectious gloom of depres¬ sion, be drew my arm through his, and ive descended the rock together.
CHAP-
CHAPTER IV.
At night, when I pressed my pillow, the no-longer-disguised wishes of my fether rose ia array before me : I dared to tax bim with cruelty and injustice, wd when I sunk to sleep, it was but to Start in hoiror, for quick in imagination did I beeome invested in the gloomy gmb of Santa Maria di Tindaro: my eyes were grown dim, my cheeks pale with midnight watchings ; the elasticity ofmy form shrunk, and tbe rich redun¬ dant ringlets, which had claimed both attention and care, severed and cast away* Terrified lest again I sliould dream of a disguise so inauspicious, I hurried from my bed, and wrapping round me a, loose gown, threw open the window, Mornmg had but newiy awakened ;
awakened; her grey eye still peeped in the east, and the heavy vapours of night, swollen and sullen, shrouded the giant outline of the scene. I gazed around, but my glance met nought save the valley, the rippling current of the San Angelo, and the heavens^ I sighed, but ho sympathizing breast murmured a re¬ sponse: dull and unsodal silence pre¬ vailed—the busy foot of man repaired not to labour, for industry berself was tranced in the death of sleep. I thought not of my fatheťs lonely pilgrimage-*—I tliought not of my mother's fatal lapse —I thought alone of myself, and every tear I shed was for that ivorld which duty forbid me to enter. Alas ! at this distant period, my wan cheek catches the glow of shame when I recai my then state of mind-—when I trace mysdf toiling, studying for my own undoing. \ r ain of my charms, gazing on the iihage which my mirror reflected,spum¬ ing the death's-head ^ and liour-gfass, which
which an experienced suffering parent ordained, almost shapeless were the schemes whkh crowded upon fancy, yet did improbability, beckoning on to ex¬ ertion, catch at the gay and rainbow tints of hope : fairy visions cheated my eves, and bliss beamed in new and un- guessed-at characters. The wrongs of my father were great, but they autho¬ rized not such a total war with bis fel¬ low-men—I thought him cold, unfor¬ giving, prejudiced, and when I reflect¬ ed он the renunciation of his rank in society, on the claims I held upon his exertion, my heart again taxed him with injustice. The day ivore away, and a gloomy cast of care shrouded our brows : m ν father seemed intent upon the past; I pictured only the future : sometimes he w ould speak upon tlie impotence of hu¬ man judgment upon the avidity witli whidi man labours after misery, but I neither ventured to sap by entreaty or weaken
weaken by aigument. I knew him prejudiced, and my dependence was щюп destiny to avat the sacrifice he meditated. On one side of our dwelling, halfway elimbing up the steep, stood the her¬ mitage of father Christian. From a lone and solitary cell it had branched into three compartments ; a dormitory, a refectory, and a diapel ; and now often smiled a shelter to the wayworn and op¬ pressed. AA'earied with tiie cares of the world, father Christian had fled its trials, and wrapt in the vesture of religion, in the spirit of true charity, prayed for the sore-laden, and held forth a brother's love to the sojourner, lt was compas¬ sion, it was the true spring and essence of religion, which led him to our dwell¬ ing when guilt spread over it the dark and impervious shroud of melancholy. He read tiie anguish rf my father's heart; he traced despair, nay, almost madness, in the fixed yet vacant gaze of
of his eye; he saw his proud spirit struggling 'gainst the tide of passion, aod when feeling vvould admit the ef¬ fort, he whispered patience and submis¬ sion. At first my father spurned the cow¬ ard virtues : all fire, he was for pursuing the fugitives—fcr tearing the victim from sin—for annihilating the graceless worthless seducer : but time and argu¬ ment softened the decision; he listened to the exordiums of piety, and in lieu of revenge substituted conciliation. Emis¬ saries were dispatched in all directions. but no trace could be found: months and years succeeded, and my fether, shunning every other human being, sub¬ mitted, and often wooed the reproving counsels of father Cliristian. Holy and blessed saint! thou who fulfilled the duties 1 neglected—thou who didst sooth the pangs of a deserted suffering parent, whispering peace to his harassed spirit, and pouring the oil of sympathy on
on bisivounded heart—holy and blessed sainţ! look from tliy high and gloriou* mansion, upon one wbo, grovelling in dust, dares raise a hope to thee, a pra)>r to Heai en! Alas' my heart strangely flutterb in my bosom ; my temples fed bound, and my brain pressed upon, as though by burning lead : tbe sisters say 1 am mad, and vet tbev do not shun me ; tliey judge me harmless—they know not the goading thorns of guilt whidi fester on my conscience, liieh in purity and innocence, tliey attribute e vay start to frenzy, not despair—*they think the morbid gloom long settled on my brow, insanity, not remorse. Time has been—I must »ot trust mvself to revise the time tiiat b$s been —if I dwell upoj^ tip hopes of tiioso, years which are flown» ^ фа11 ; be as they suspect me, mad —$p, no ! I must forego my pen, prostrate mysplf before the altar, there pray for pajçdoi^ud p^íçe, VOL. I, D CIİAİ*-
CHAPTER V.
Μ γ head has been strangely disturbed —my heart has been side almost unto death—I have seen the holy sisters weep around my couch—I have heard the pious prayers of the mother superior; and yet I could imt weep with them, I could not pray with them ; the fountaui of my tears was dried up, and my tongue, pardied by consuming fever» deaved to the roof of my mouth. But the straggle is past, and now, hi tbe solitude of my cell, am I wearing away the hour of midnight in perpetuating tiie eventual record of my life. My fether loved me with no common løve, and even when he thought to pre¬ sent me an offering to Heaven, it was because he judged the human heart too corrupt
corrupt to be entrusted with the charge. He fdt that sorrow was gradually relax¬ ing his hold ai life and when he re¬ called the snares wbieb bad entrapped my beauteous mother, when he gazed upon the expanding bloom of my dieek, and traced the rich promise of her re¬ dundant charms, he trembled lest a second Helena should sink tlic piey of villany. Such, and such alone, were the motives which instigated his wishes; it was love, pure love—not the zeal of bigotry, or the idle sway of caprice : the ingratitude of an almost-worshipped wife, conveying a fatal proof of ivoman's frailty, sanctified the decision, and hal¬ lowed the calling. Too young and too ardent to become a convert to the reasonings of caution, I yet smothered every murmur of re¬ pugnance, though woefully do I confess, that my reliance and my dttty slacken¬ ed, that uvy sentiments and my feelings became jaundiced, tiiat the dangerous, d 2 the
the accursed poison of independence*, waylaid my heart, and more than once did a perturbed and tyrannizing spirit impel me to fly the ties of nature, and burst unknown on the world. I con¬ sidered myself the devoted victim of prejudice, and not all the exordiums of father Christian, nor all the penanees en¬ joined by reHgion, could eradicate a per¬ verse and headstrong will. But why linger o'er the fetal conviction of weak¬ ness?—why pause to portray a heart whieh actions best can speak ? The only change whieh relieved the dull monotony of our dwelling was an oc¬ casional visit to the hermitage ofour holv neighbour. Sometimes my father would accompany me, but oftener did I wan¬ der alone : he liked not to encounter the gaze of casual sojourners, and tbe retreat of father Christian was a rendez¬ vous for the unfortunate and tiie pious. The burnish of a setting sun still glowed in the west, when I quitted the cottage,
cottage, and sought tbe heatlb-grown path leading to tbe hermitage. During the day tbe spirits of my father had been more than usually depressed ; tears had washed his sorrow-beaten cheeks; curses had died half-uttered on bis lips : and, harrowed by contending emotion, often had his start been frenzied. Mine, too, had caught the infection of sadness —I felt that woe within ivbieh beggars words; and wben I readied the cross which marked the entrance of the cha¬ pel, I paused with a reverence, with a hoi}' awe, till then unfelt It was the hour for vespers, yet the chapel-door was dosed—I raised the latch—I push¬ ed it open, but I sought in vain for father Christian: his cell too was de¬ serted, and, concluding him absent on a mission of charity, I returned to the step of the altar, and bent my knee in worship. My prayer was for peace to my father—for conversion to my mother : every perturbed thought became hush- D 3 ed,
ed, the wished-for world forgotten : in my " mind's eye," I behekl my mother« a lowly penitent, at the altar of her God—I beheld on the furrowed brow of my father, gratitude chasing every ves¬ tige of despair. My hands were clasped —my eyes were raised to Heaven; doubtless the ardour of my fedings glowed on every feature.—" Oh, blessed Mary !" I articulated, " hear the prayer of thy siipjdiant-t-bhul the bleeding wounds ofthe heart !" I heard no step, no breath, no indi¬ cation of a human being, and yet, when I turned to quit the ehapel, I beheld a stranger gazing at me. I started, but I eould not fly—oh no! rivetted, rooted as it were to the spot, how could I turn from the being my eyes encountered? It was not father Christian, nor like father Christian—-tall, majestic, a port of dignity, an eye of fire, yet tempered witb such softness, catching such ema¬ nations of soul, that the artist's magic pencil
pencil could not have perpetuated the outiine. The stranger with respectful diffi. dence advanced.—" I have alarmed you, lady," he said; " I sought father Chris¬ tian at the altar : the samt has fled, and in his stead I find an angel !" I could only bow at the gallantry of the speech ; my face felt on fire, and my eyes were bent to the ground.— " Pardon an involuntary error," he con¬ tinued, attributing the burning tide of confusion to displeasure : 4 * when I crossed the threshold of the chapel, I dreamt not the vision I was about to see." Still I spoke not—I moved not; trembling, confused, I suffered him to take my band, nor did I attempt to withdraw it, until in imagination the dark eyes of my father seemed fixed upon me : then I started ; a terror before unknown crept through me, and snatch- ing away my liand, I would have fled, but the stranger spmng forward-—he D 4 intercepted
intercepted my path.—" Stay," he im¬ plored, ** nor force me to regret what I could liope to number as the brightest hov of my life. Lady ! sweet maid ' angjiic Helena ! паше but the houi when again at this altar your pure vows may lie renewed ?" Amazed, bewildered, vet too evident- ly allured by the subtle poison flattery, I could only repeat my own name, and then, vvith unfeigned surprise, demand ivhere and hovv he had Known me. For a moment be hesitated, then with an arch smile exclaimed—" Hovv in the Piano di Brolo could I sojourn without hearing oí* its brightest gem? On the banks of the San Angelo 1 first beheld the beauteous Helena, looking like the goddess of the stream ; wonder not then if from tbat moment I liave watched for a second glance, with an ardour, with an enthusiasm, which puts to flight all the cold unfeeling cautions of misan¬ thropy." " My
** My father," I articulated, starting and hastening forward ; " holy Heaven ! if mv father could behold me now—" " Do you fear your father ?" "No; I love my father, and would not for worlds oppose his wishes." ** Prejudice, sweet maid, has made your father unjust: lie weighs mankind by one standard, and teaches even inno¬ cence the contraction of suspicion," ** If my father could behold me notv" I repeated, regardless of the remark ; then pausing almost in terror, I con¬ tinued—* % Yonder is our dwelling : if }ou would save me displeasure, in mer¬ cy proceed no fiirther." t% Be your wish my law," replied the stranger : fc ' yet a moment stay, charm¬ ing Helena, and by that merey you so¬ licit, name the hour you will again visit the chapel" " 1 cannot —I dare not ; should my father behold vou, 1 shall visit it no more." Do I snatched
ï ^lâtetı^ Itìy liana from hhn— î fled Hvith tiie i^cípitüney of thought ; yet, when I reached the wkker gate, ï pàiis* ed, and turning, behdd the stranger srtatiotied on the spot I had quitted. Alas! what new% what indeàclìbablè emotiotìs rushed to my heart ! a burning glow dyed my cheek, a tremulous agi¬ tation pervaded my frame. I ought to have shrunk from the allurement, but I eould not ; and in the hope of catch¬ ing one more glance, I hastened up the roek, nor paused till I reached the high¬ est pinnacle o'erlooking the stream of the San Angelo. I saw the lone cell of father Christian : the gloom of twiliglit was fast gathering, and yet I could dis¬ cern the littie chapd I had just quitted, and the ero$s marking its entrance, but not the majestic form I sotrght«— -<At ho ! in imagination alone did I behold him, and on imagination he was impressed for ever. Disappointed aud dispirited, I had half descended the rock when I beheld
ieheld the stranger on the opposite bank «*f flie river; be frequentiy stopped, looking around as though carefully sur¬ veying our romantic garden ; and when he beheld me, he waved his hand with Aat kind of caution which seems to fair the eye of cognizance.—" Alas !" I in¬ wardly mused, as again I lost sight of him, " why is our door closed against our fellow-beings? Cruel fetlier! to de¬ bar me the delightful intercourse of friendship ; too sure it must be unjust to weigh mankind by one standard." I returned to my home, but I re¬ turned not with the light heart I had quitted it: alas, no! it was consumed by contending passions, for fear and hope struggled for mastery. My fkther, absorbed by his own internal cares, l)e- held not the traces of agitation ; lie saw not the heightened colour of my check -—he noted not my trembling hand, nor the attention with which 1 sought to evade inquiry. Joyfully did I crave d 6 his
his blessing, and flying to the secure shelter of my own chamber, wooed the luxury of thought Wild, romantic, the events of the last hour seemed to colour my future life ; love held every other sense captive; and before the morn¬ ing dawned, I felt, I owned, tbat I had seen tbe being destined to sway euch coming hope. Perturbed—sleepless, I arose with the sun : Heaven kqows, my bosom glowed with no religious zeal, and yet I sought the chapel of father Christian. Prostrate before the altar, I beheld the man of God, but the hero of my waking visions came not; all was blank silence, all was cheerless disap¬ pointment I dared not give speech to the feelings of my heart—I dared not breathe inquiry. Father Christian hail¬ ed me with his blessing, but he spoke not once of the stranger. Again I knelt before the altar, again I strove to com¬ mune witb myself; but the power ivas gone ; my eyes ivandered around, and everv
every sound I heard quickened my breathing.—>" Alas !" I exclaimed, as I retraced my path, " wimt new evil as¬ sails me ? why should a being, whose existence but yesterday I knew not, supersede every call of duty ? why------" I paused, for I beheld the stranger brushing, with hasty step, tbe dewy gems of morning. Why did I pause, as though wooing his approach ? why did I hail him with an inviting smile ? He came, and I forgot we had met but once before ; he sjioke, and I tarried be¬ yond the hour of breakfast 4% Blessed meeting !" he exclaimed, iv ith an ardour I shall never forget ; " I thought to behold the dwelling of He¬ lena, and I meet Helena's selt" I smiled ; my cheek glowed with ex- ulting consciousness, and I listened to the homage of adulation with an avidity not to be misconstrued. From tbat period my doom was fix¬ ed.
idi t dared not breathe the secret to toy father, and I plunged headlong into mystery «nd disguise. Not a day pass¬ ed without meeting the idol ofmy souľs #öf$Mp*-not a night which did not unfold to my eager eyes the written TïlïifSdript <tf his feelings. But I will »e$ dwell upon щу own weakness, or !h# tleguffing snare whidi fed to my undoing: the rectitude of йш hea#t önce sapped, where exists the banier which paesku will not violate? My father remained unconscious of my apos¬ tacy, and the secret correspondence whkh waylaid my heart shall live the record of sophistry. Stranger, if tiiou art young, if thoa art guileless, suffer not thy hand to grasp, tiiy finger to sever, the seal of clandestine intercourse; suffer not thy judgment to be hoodwinked, thy mind to l e ensnared within the labyrintìis of disguise. Be ttie tongue mute wliidi cannot
eennot Speek ift open truth : 'tis deed* of darkness alone wfcieh covet conceal· ment.
СЙАРТЕИ VI. Ф+* 4Н *4 + + * * ■+* * + ***+ " Though yo« bid me hot write to you, Helena, my feelings defy control, and I must dare even your displeasure, rather than fly to that cold, cold recipe, patience. W r hy should I not ivrité to you ?—why should I not give form to the sentiments you have inspired ?--why should ï irait for that age to-morrow, wlien tbis hour, nay, every breath I draw, is devoted to the contemplation of your perfections ? I shall see you to-morrow, but I must write to you to-niglrt-—I must beguile the tedious hours of wakefulness, in telling you that our meeting at the cha¬ pd has been conclusive. It eould not have
have been accident, it must have been t]ie hand of fate itself which led me to that chapel. Sweet saint! you heard not my approach—you dreamt not in¬ trusion, even when my eyes rested on your perfect features : but your aspira¬ tion—I shall never forget your aspira¬ tion, bind tke bleeding wminds of the heart! Forgive me, Helena, but I would fein know whose heart has been WQiinded, and wiry an angd Hke you should breathe sudi an appeal? Your father, respected even in his prejudices, has doubtless experienced misfortune; but how can* his heart bleed when he has you to sooth him ? Oh ! exile me frorø all that this world holds precious, severme from every tie of kindred ща of 1\охщ , osuple my name with ignominy, stamp me the victim, of injustice—be yo^ my eopfiforter,and the maHce of man is powerless. K 44 I know not what to think—is it love, or is it fear, whieh makes you so watchful
watchful of a fatheťs wishes? Your cheek faded even to the bleached down of the cygnet when you bid me leave you, when you articulated, if my father could behold me now, I can hear nought of Montcalm but that he is a man of mystery and of silence—nought of bis beauteous child but that he would bury her frøm the world. Unjust father ! to withhold a gem, so rare, so matchless ! what affliction can warrant a sacrifice so dire? Tell me, Helena, if the veil of mystery may be withdrawn, why does your father shun all commune with his fellow-beings?—why does he hide you in a retirement so impervious ? If worid- ly interest ean blunt the shaft of endu¬ rance, I possess that interest Let him speak through his angel child, and though it be to fly to the globe's furthest extremity, though it be to snatch the rose of promise from beneath the torrid zone, or to seek it on the snows of Zem¬ bla,
Ыа, the heart, the energy of Eugenius will not feil."
Thie letter, whicl* was conveyed to me wkh a secrecy which baffled every fear of detection, filled me with exulta¬ tion and joy*— 4 * Why should my fether tremble for my future happiness?* I exclaimed, " why should he seek bo im¬ mure me from the woild? Before I beheld Eugenius, the cloistered eeH was hateful to my feelings; now death, come in wimt shape it may, would be prefer¬ able. » Ho, no, my fether,* and I pressed the letter to my lips and to my heart, ** Hdena will never assume the garb of Santa Maria di Tindaro." A hundred times did my fingers grasp the pai, did my feelings dictate; but the effusion was too warm—I burnt each unfinished scrawl, and dissatisfied alike with mysdf and шу performance, turned to
to a new pursuit; but, alas! my pencil traced but the features of Eugemus, and if I swept my lyre, love teemed in the thrilling cadence. Absorbed by his ow F n ivoes, my father marked not the change : ever ready at his call, whether my smile was nature, or whether it was assumed, I still smiled, and he dived not beneath the surface. It was in the evening of the receipt of that treasured letter, that my fether proposed visiting the cell of the holy Christian. I dared not object and yet when I sought my bonnet, I felt a pang at my heart for I knew that if 1 saw Eugenius, even the courtesy of recogni¬ tion could not be exchanged. With & sensation amounting almost to dread, I gazed around, but no living being did my eyes encounter. My father drew my arm through his, and we traversed the romantic pathway in silence. Ön coming within sight of the hermitage, mv
my father suddenly stopped.—*· AVe will return," he exclaimed, * 4 a stranger holds converse with father Christian." 1 too had caught a glimpse of that stranger—it was Eugenius; my cheek crimsoned—my heart fluttered ; but my father observed not my emotion. 44 Come on, Helena," he continued ; * 4 1 thought at this hour we had been safe." 44 AVe are safe," Γ ventured to reply. 44 Look, my father, in yon stranger there is nothing to alarm." I would have turned, but be dragged me onwards. "Helena," he pronounced, in accents which thrilled througb me, " 1 have once been stung nearly to deatli, and iv ill tempt my fate no further," 44 Does treachcrv harbour in every human heart?" I asked. " Mibt vve, because once betrayed, suspect the my¬ riad ?" ·' Alb
" All, all selfish— all, all unfeeling," murmured mv father; " safetv Hes in evading; parley, girl, and you are lost." There w r as a wildness in bis look and manner, which terrified me; be still grasped my hand—he still hurried for¬ ward, nor did be once pause, until we iiad lost sight of the liermitage; tben gasping for breath, he clung to my arm, and reclined his bead upon my shoulder. Trembling for his safety, I thought ïiot even of the being from whom he fled, and when the voice of Frugoni us roused every dormant power of my father, I too started, for I dreamt not that he bad shadowed our footsteps. 44 Suffer me to assist you, lady," he urged, in accents gentle and persuasive ; 44 my arm is powerful, and my incHna¬ tion good." 44 AVe need no assistance," said my fe¬ ther, coldly, " nor change, save your absence." Indignation
Indignation crimsoned tbe cheek, flashed from the eye of Eugenius, yet he hesitated to answer; and when, al¬ most sinking with shame mid vexation, I attempted to interpose, my fether rudely snatched my arm, and pushed me before him. " Fly, hasten horae !" he exclaimed ; ** there at least our gate can secure us from intruders." " How can I convince the signor Mont¬ calm," said Eugenius, following, " that my heart is as his own—that its feeHngs merit neither suspkion or contempt ?" " Can you read my heart ?" asked my father, with a smile of irony. " Boy, you overrate your powers. The heart is too deep hid. Not age—not philo¬ sophy ------" As he spoke, he turned his eyes to the face of Eugenius—that fece æted as the basilisk—it seemed to paralyze, even though it rivetted : the unfinished sen¬ tence
tence died щюп his tongue, and rage and hatred, almost amounting to frenzy, convulsed every feature. Agitated, dismayed, I could only im¬ plore the astonished Eugenius to quit us, and even then it was long ere my father regained any thing like rationality. Bitter was tiie torrent of his revilings: he called Eugenius the destroyer of his peace, the blaster of his honour; and when I ventured to observe that, till this hour, be had never behdd him, be bid me bold my peace, or join with him in the curse he called down· Holy saints ! bow can I portray the agony of that moment !—how did I withhold my¬ self from felling at my father's feet, from telling him tlie being he cursed was the sun ivhich warmed the life of my exist¬ ence! How did I stay tiie flutterings of my heart !—how did I hide that that heart must be dead to sensation, ere it ceased to cherish Eugenius as tihe mas¬ ter-spring of its wishes! Deep
Deep w*as the gloom wiiich succeeded this fearful storm : mv fether first order- ing me not to stray beyond the garden, shut himself within his chamber, and for two long hours doomed me to my oivn thoughts. Refractory even in a moment so critical, I flew to the roek, panting, pining to behold Eugenius, and, by signal, to convey comfort to his lacerated feeHngs. He came, and I seemed to move on air. He paused on the «opposite bank of the river—he stretched Iris arms towards me, and then he raised his clasped hands to Heaven, as tliough in appeal for the faith and fer¬ vour of his vows ; I approached the very brink of tbe predpiee—I bent forward —I looked down upon him, although my brain felt dizzy, and not till fancy wafted approaching footsteps on the air, did I spring from the pinnacle on whkh I tottered ; then I motioned for Euge¬ nius to depart, and then I hastened down the rock to meet, as I thought, my fa¬ ther.
ther. It was not my father, but a ser¬ vant sent to request I would join bim in his study. I trembled as I approach¬ ed the door, for I felt tliat a new conflict w r as preparing ; a thousand fears crowd¬ ed upon me, and when I placed my hand upon the lock, my spirit sank even to weeping. Tlie expression of my father s features was changed; sadness bad su¬ perseded frenzy ; his bead reclined upon bis band, and the traces of tears were still visible* He beckoned to a chair be¬ side bim, and then he threw bis arms «round me, and for numy moments fold¬ ed me in silence to his bosom. 44 Yes," he at length articulated, " to ensure уош safety, 1 can even put you from me. If this dwelling no longer yields an asylum, then, tben, Hdena, ive must part I labour but for your secu¬ rity ; patiently will I relinquish tbe only comfort of my lacerated heart, to snatch my child from tbe evils ivbieh threaten." " Tell me, my father,' 4 I implored» VOL, L r, '* what
" what evils, what dangers does your anxious affection conjure? Alas ! what am I to learn ? wbere am I to go? and why are we to be parted?" " This stranger—this interloper," mur¬ mured my father, " he comes to blast the little remnant left of peace. Like another spedous viUain, he wears tbe smile of conciliation. If he should coil around your heart—if he should stmg vou to death—if-----* " Hold, hold !" I exclaimed, " nor let prejudice war against the innocent Would you banish me the haunts ofmy infancy, because chance led a stranger hither? wouid you sever the earliest ties of nature, because an eye besides your own has glanced upon me ? Whi¬ ther can I go, where the like chance may not prevail? Look into this valley, mark its variegated beauties, its genial soil, its luxuriant culture, then tell me ivhether curiosity may not have led that stranger hither ?—tell me also, if in pur¬ suit
suit of new researdies» he may not quit this valley and think ofit no more ?" 44 Would he liad rested in his grave ere he crossed our pathway!" said my father, thoughtfully. I shuddered,— fi Helena,"hecontinued, "if you should quit your home—if уон should parley witb this stranger—mark me, giri," and his features assumed a temfyii^g stern¬ ness, 4i that hour, be it in the gloom of evenmg, or in the glare of mornings re¬ moves you to Santa Maria di Tindaro. There at least you wffl be safe, and knowing you are so, I shaH escape the rack ivhich noiv torments me. Nay, at¬ tempt not to alta* my resolve : tiie time will come wlien you will gratefully thank my decision. Apart from all the seductive witcheries of tbis world, dead to its connexions, and to its temptations, you will harbour no wishes inimical to your soul's peace, no treacherous hopes which teem but with destruction. Re¬ member you have long known tbe bent i: 5ž of
of my inequation, tbe decision of my experience. There is too circumstance the offering I meditate: before,I go down to the grave> I must receive your solemn promise to become professed, or 1 must вее your brow shrouded with the in¬ augurating veil. Keep tbis fiat in mind ; fet it shadow every dazzling dream of worldly hope, or instead of the indulgent peräät you have ever known, you will find mé fiim and inexorabk in the fulfil¬ ment of my duty." Alas ! I could argue nought—I could urge nought to avert my denounced doom; to protract it then became my aim, and from that ill-starred evening deceit was familiar. Under the dange¬ rous plea of necessity, I lulled myself into its assumption, until it soon lost its corrosive power upon my conscience, or rather, conscience was hushed to rest, and awoke nettili sophistry eould cheat no further. At
At the hour of rest, as was my usual custom, I kissed the wan cheek of my parent, but it was with a sensation id- most amounting to coldness; and wiien I retired to my chamber, the appalling colour of my fate, floating on my be¬ wildered faculties, instigated the mur¬ murs which faltered on my lips.—" Holy Heaven!" I ejaculated* " ean a father seal the eternal fiat df his child's misery? —can he r deaf to the pleading voice of nature, doom alt her warm and ardent faneies to the freezing chill of despair ? —can he lose sight of tlie impulsive ties which link our destinies ?—can he shut out for ever the resplendency of hope, and blighting the future bright horizon, exchange it for a prospect, desolate, cheerless, and drear? Oh no, no! he eannot—he must not" I exclaimed, as hope faintly fluttered in ray bosom— " Nature wars not against herself, and his heart, reviving to mercy and to pity, will yet be the repository of mine: quick- E S ening
# eningbeneath the warm pressure of affec¬ tion, all its thoughts, all its wishes will be revealed, and the contraction of pre¬ judice destroyed through the medium of the now-proseribed Eugenius." Thus Ad I Strive to argue myself into serenity, into sanguine expectation—the gloomy walls of Santa Maria di Tindaro faded from imagination, and a glow of trandent rapture stole upon my feeHngs* The moon shone into my chamber—I conld not sleep, and extinguishing my lights and opening my casement, I stood watching the dark columns, as occasion¬ ally floating over her surface, they ob¬ scured her radiant disk. A thousand fantastic shadows danced below, and the soft ripplings of the San Angelo was all that the ear eaught of 4 sound. Soothed by the sublimity of the seene, I stood gazing on the little path winding up my favourite rock, until I almost fended forms, and størted at the coinage of my own creation. Suddenly my pulse quick¬ ened,
ened, my heart bounded as though it would have forced a passage, for I not only beheld a form, but I heard the care¬ ful tread of one whose smile was the an¬ tidote to every sublunary woe : it was Eugenius. The loose doak could not veil the majesty of bis figure, neither could his slouched bat obscure features impressed on my mind as indelibly as the fiat of fate itself,. Amazed, trans¬ ported, yet fearing to move, lest my eyes should lose the outline wbich «dazzled them, I marked hi» measured pace, and when he paused in front of our dwelling, searce conscious of what I did, I half pronounced his name, then blushed at my own temerity., Itwas too late—the night breeze wafted the sound, and with one bound Eugemus stood beneath my casement. 44 Helena," he pronounced, in accents whieh spoke delight, 44 1 behold you, and my wanderings are rewarded!" Then holding a letter towards me—" See," he E 4 continued,
continued, ** I come the messenger of my ow» epistle. I eome—— " I interrupted him by imploring liim to depart, for I trembled, lest aeddent betraying this interview to my father, should ruin me past the possibility tø save. In vain be whispered courage— in vain he sought to cheat me with vows of tender, of undying interest r my fears were too impulsive, and though my heart treasured eaeh syllable, I still urged Mm to depart, with а *еЬете*'*се almost terrifying. At his instis ition I dropped a string from the vind >w to which he affixed his letter, and secure in the pos¬ session of my treasure, I saw him quit the garden with a sensation bordering upon joy. The oppressive load of fear was re¬ moved from my heart, and recaffing eaeh fond expression, I lingered o^r again the treacherous tale of love. AVith what a bitter pang did I look towards the ex¬ tinguished light ! Alas! I could only re¬ gret
gret my predpitàney, for though I se¬ vered the seal, the rays of the moon ivere too faint to decipher the characters -—patience then was my only alternaive —I wooed my pillow, and when I eould not sleep, thought of my treasure, and prayed for its dearer writer. Aurora's rosy finger beckoned me from my rest¬ less couch,,but though I hailed the saffian radiance with delight, before I offered up thanksgiving for the opening of a new day, I flew to the potent talisman. How did my cbeeks glow—how did my heart exult, as I read the fond acknowiedg- ment of passion ! Every difficulty was forgotten in the transporting certainty, and authority threatened no obstacle with which love feared to cope. 44 Though stung to the aoul," wrote Eugenius, 44 1 am alive to gratitude; yes, Helena, gratitude to tbat Heaven which has created you with fedings unlike your father. It cannot be misfortune whkh has dried up the warm sluices of E 5 humanity
humanity—no, there is some hidden spring whkh policy forbids to reveal. I must see you, must converse with you, even tiiough I brave the maddening tempest of Montcalm's wrath—God of Nature! can Montcalm be the parent of such loveliness, of such perfection ? An¬ gel girl! you cannot be happy under an influence so arbitrary; tke bleeding wounds of the heart are revealed. You dare not accuse the tyranny ofhim who dares to tyrannize, yet you feel that ty¬ ranny; you droop in secret; Hke the virgin lily in the blast, your head bends beneath the storm you would fain essay to stem. Can I live, and knew you un¬ happy? Oh, Helena! unbosom your griefs to me^—tell me the secret woe—» confide in a heart, whose warm and fer¬ vent adoration the iey chill of death can alone destroy. " Since the first moment my better genius conducted to yon chapel, I have felt to exist ; till then I did but breathe —I did
~1 did but fulfil tbe common functions of Hfe, without aim, without stimulus: no Hving soul taught me the value of my being; vapid, insipid, years rolled aw r ay, unmarked, unenjoyed. Now a new era arises: fanned by the balmy zephyr of transporting passion, my heart points to one goaly my eyes rest upon one object ; Helena, you are that object— you are tbe taUsman whieh banishes sleep, whieh wooes me even in the dead of night, from every warm and social comfort, to gaze upon tiie silent walls which close you from my view. Gra- eious Heaven ! to be shut out from tliose walls* to be denied the privilege of speak¬ ing to* of knowing, of beholding you ! 44 How сан! elude the policy of your fether?—how silence his fears?—-how steal mto his cold heart? Can he see the perfections of bis child, and doubt the sincerity of her lover ? Believe me, he is the slave of prejudice; for however tøpan nature may be frail, it flies not e Ö from.
from its own happiness—Ob no F to that whkh constitutes fdidty it diøgs— -it may be selfish, but it cannot be imjust. Write to me; in mercy teach me 1k>w to resnect, tell me how to baffle the stern mandates of Montcalm ; remember, daz¬ zled by your perfections, I am beeome the slave of my own feelings: talk not tlien of forbearance, of submission : the cold axioms of philosophy are trite; they may do for common passions, btit not for a passion inspired by you. He¬ lena, you must write to me. Heaven be praised! your eyes bespeak not indiffer¬ ence—they turn not away in contempt, or in scorn : if then my peace, my life, is of the smallest importance, direct me how to æt, iiow to win yoo ; for thougb 1 have met you but seldom, those meet¬ ings are prophetic of an attachment whieh can terminate but with existence. To¬ morrow night, lovely, angelie Hdena, when the Argus-eye of suspicion is closed, when the light sliall no longer shine
shine ftom your fetheťs casement, I wffl steal beneath уомг$> and watch for the answer to my letter ; to+nmrrow nights sweet arbitress of my destiny, write, or to-morrow night doses, and the ensuing inondng finds me at my station. 44 Eugenius" How did eaeh line, eaeh magic sen¬ tenee, penetrate into the deepest reeess of my heart! with wiiat avidity did*I peruse and repenise the precious eoofi?^ mation of entbralment ! Eugemus loved! me, and my eye rested on tbe image* whieh my mirror reflected, with exulta¬ tion, with transport. I studied eaeh grace—I tried to augment eaeh beauty г pleasure heightened the vivid tint on my cheek, and when I combed back the raven ringlets which shrouded røy brow, I smiled at my own vanity. 4i Eugenius loves me" ivas all tbat my proud heart could frame ; and even when presiding at the breakfast-board, the melancholy gloom of my father's feature» could not chill
éhül the warm ardour of expectation* No pang, no reluctance attended the con¬ sciousness of disguise; the only study was to preserve my secrets for discovery threatened even worse than death : the power ofa parent was absolute, and once removed to a cloister prison, I knew that resistance or remonstrance would alike be vain. Ab, fatal snarse ! fatal progress of dissimulation !—But I wander—alas í I forget thai my reader knows but the dawning of my sad story- Apparentiy attentive to the mandate ef my father, I attempted not to quit the house, and whilst be thought me absorb¬ ed in study, that study was framing an epistle to Eugenius. For a moment the magnitude of tiie undertaking daunted my courage : a hydra phalanx of difficul¬ ties crowded upon each other, and but fcr the black veil of profession, even tlie enthusiasm of first awakened passion bad been subdued : but emandpation from a threatened life of bondage called for ex¬ ertion ;
ertion ; the death's-head and the hour¬ glass, the vigil and the matin òdi, swam on my mental vision, and the struggles of duty gradually became fainter. The first few lines ofmy letter was self-accu¬ sation : I called myself ungrateful, and yet I dared pursue the track of ingrati¬ tude—I bid Eugenius write no more» then closed the sentence by owning I should always feel interested in his hap¬ piness—if in one line I solidted him to quit the Piano di Brolo, in tbe succeed¬ ing I dedmed all influence over his ac¬ tions. Blessed saints! what inconsistency was there in tbat letter ! like the mind of tbe writer, it was all chaos; yet to one deep skilled in the subtilty of love, it betrayed what I sought to have con¬ cealed, Dropped in the secrecy of night from my window, in vesting it in the hands of Eugenius, I gave him a power over myself, whkh stamped the die df my destiny. Weak, inconsiderate being! like
like the luckless bird, I saw not tbe snare, until I became entangled. With ivhat avidity did I watch the stealing advance of evening, pining again to lıear the niiispered accents of Euge¬ nius, again to trace tbe outline of his majestic figure. Night came, and its ebon reign w r as more consonant to my feeling* than all tbe garish brilliancy of cloudless day—I lingered but to hear all hushed'within tbe chamberof mv fether, and then hastening fo my ovvn, secured the door, and softly opened tbe easement. Soon did my ears greet the Hght tread of caution; soon did my searching glance trace the almost-gliding figure of Euge¬ nius, swift as fabled fear, as he crossed from tbe shrubbery. He came, and I knew no hope beyond ; again and again did he breathe the witching vow of eter¬ nal constancy, and till long after tbe moonbeams had stolen upon our confer¬ ence, was the pang of adieu delayed ; then,
Ihen, enriched alike with the written transcript of affection, we parted in the soothing promise of another clandestine interview. * To Helena. 44 Explain to me, Helena, why, in absence, tbe pen is my only resource ? why my eyes, if they wander frema the paper, seek but one direction? and why my heart, constant as the needle to tbe pole, flies alone to you ? I know that Philosophy's self cannot resolve the mystery of affection, and yet I wrould fain crave you to expound what baffles human wisdom. I would implore you to tell me the silken chain in ivhich you have fettered my feeHngs, and the om¬ nipotent sway which stamps me your willing slave. I cannot quit tbis valley, though in this valley I should find my grave: no, Helena, the passion you have inspired is not the idle start of ca¬ price—it is eternal—it mingles with my beins;
being, and supersedes every claimant upon earth. The home of my infancy is forgotten—the mother who bore me is secondary—I return to them no more —1 bid them an everlasting adieu, un¬ less you consent to share them with me, to heighten by smiHng upon my enjoy¬ ments. Henceforth I know no hope unmingled with your image, no bliss which you do not bestow. In vain do I seek to decipher the plans and inten¬ tions of your father; they are hidden, they are dark and inexplkable as him¬ self; even father Christian knows not, or wffl not resolve bis motives. This niorning I visited the chapel—I ap¬ proached the step of the altar, but my eyes were not gladdened by the beaute¬ ous vision wbkh hovers eternally in my memory—Oh no! Perhaps, my too- lovely friend, I have barred your pas¬ sage; perhaps your cruel father, perse¬ cuting me almost to death, forbids you even the privilege of worship. Holy saints *
saints! what have I done to excite an enmity so dire ?—what can I do to dis¬ arm a wratii which would annihilate every joy ? ShaH I write to Montcalm ? or shall I intrude myself into his pre¬ sence, and tell him I must be heard? shall 1 sap his heart by recalKng the sea¬ son of youth ? Tell me, Helena, will the revival of your mother's memory aid my petition ? Disguise is repugnant to my feelings—I ivould woo you in open day. Helena, / must be heard, or desperation becomes my alternative. * Eugenius/' 44 To Eugenius. vr* 44 No, no, my friend, not for the universe must you force yourself into tbe presence of my father—must you breathe tbe name of my mother ; it ivould awaken no tenderness—it ivould excite no commiseration—it would but increase tbe diHgence which guards røe —it would but augment our difficul¬ ties
tim and our despair. Alas ! wbat can I bid you do? Were I to be guided by reason, I should gay— 4 Fly, and behold me no more ; seek in distance the obli¬ teration of passion, and leave me to my destiny.' I admit its colour is cheerless, but till I beheld you—oh Eugenius ! till I beheld you, it was bearable; now------ Alas ! what am I writing? Bid you fly from me·, and in the same moment ac¬ knowledge your estrangement w r ould be death! It is your better judgment, jour stronger mind which must direct : I am weak, very weak, my friend ; I know the insurmountable obstacle whieii exists, and yet I am enslaved by my redings. I know that I can never be yours, and yet I cherish the flame of false beguiling hope. Fly then, Euge¬ nius, in mercy fly. In tbe circle of home, in the endearments of vour fa- mily, woo the return of peace, and for¬ get Montcalm and his devoted 44 Helena." - 2b.
44 To Helena. 44 1 know the insurmountable obstacle which ewists —/ know that I can never be yours. Holy saints ! do I read right, and do I retain my senses? You deceive yourself, Helena. If you are free, no obstacle under heaven can exist, can enish the governing princi¬ ple of the soul, can curb the daring flights of passion* Fly &om you ! for¬ get you ! Cruel girl, command where I can obey, prescribe within the reach of possibility. No, 1 camiot fly—I cannot forget you : no consideration, no earthly tie, shall tempt me from the spot you inhabit; I will linger near vou—I will gaze upon your dwelling—I will breathe the air you breathe, even though hi tbat air I inhale a mortal poison ; love has become tbe elemental principle of my being, and when I cease to love, the awful fiat of destiny will be accomplish¬ ed: yes, Helena, I shall cease to love when the stone pillows my head ; when the*
the sward presses on my bosom, your image will be effaced. Alas! is it for this that I have hugged the rainbow visions of hope, that I have rioted over anticipated scenes of coming bliss, with¬ out once picturing the mildew blast of disappointment If you are destined for another, if you can be happy with another, tell me so, and though my heart break in the effort, I WÄ1 try to ■submit Fear not ; in the last agony of mortal separation, you shall not heai* the groan of my despair. Eugenius." ** To Eugenius. ** 'Tis you who deceive youi^ «elf, my fiiend; 'tis you who torture yourself with false fears. No, I am not destined for another; I could not be happy with another ; and if it will chase despair, know that your presence has made the prescribed path of duty diffi¬ cult. In taxing me with cruelty, you
are
are yourself unjust; recall the past, then tell Hie what is it you fear? Ungrate¬ ful Eugenius, have not my eyes betrayed a language whieh stamps those fears nu* gatory? When I bid you forget me, is it not your peace that I seek? Have I ever promised to set the example ? Oh no, no ! fbr that promise would be vain. AA r ere I to behold you no more, memo¬ ry would still recall your image: yes, my friend, and the last lingering accent of my lips would be a prayer for your prosperity. My father is actuated by no common motive ; ivere you an em¬ peror, your suit would be rejected : di¬ vorced for ever from the world, dead to all that it can offer, his decree is immu¬ table. Seek not to sift my destiny ; be satisfied to know that my heart spurns disguise—that necessity, not incHnation, stamps the seal upon my lips. " Helena.*
"Го
« To Helena. " I w r ill try to obey you, He¬ lena—I will try to be satisfied without diving into tbe mystery which sur¬ rounds you ; but remember, even in ig¬ norance, my aim shall be to avert tbe des tiny wiiich would estrange us. No, my too-lovely friend, the heart cannot re* linquisb its hopes of happiness, even at your bidding : as the flame cleaves to the sickly taper, so will it deave to you, nor expire till every genial spring of life has failed. Alas ! thougli I would fain adhere to the command enjoined, my thoughts, self-willed and biassed, turn incessantly to the gloom which o'erclouds your youth—to the seclusion, to the morbid solitude by whicii you are surrounded. Can a parent gazing on the angel semblance of an only child, exile that diild from every haunt of so¬ cial fellowship ? can be selfishly isolate her from the claims of kindred, and not have his justice and bis humanity im¬ peached °
peached? irere I an emjyeror, my sy i* геопМ be rejected. Gracious Heaven ! do not those freezing words imply tkd Montcalm lives but for himself—that to minister to his caprice, aiul occasionally expel the courted clouds of misanthropy, be wonld withhold you from all those warm and harmonious enjoy mente which cement the union of 4 sympathizing hearts ? Tell me» Hek»na, does not your feeHngs war agaimt tills stretch of arbi¬ trary power? do tbey not spurn tbe curb which mistaken duty would im¬ pel / 'ТЫ true, duty ÌKiaHs a strong hold, but Nature, my too-lovely friend, is ever, stronger than duty; sbe traiu- pks on tho sway which would restrict her attributes, she rises triumphant, spite of every jarring opposition. I liave a parent, indulgent even to weakness ; one who has fostered me as tbe hope of pro¬ mise, vvho has studied all my whims, and shielded me from every threatened care: vvere that parent to bid me banish vol. í. r your
your image, though disgrace ànd mise*» rv stood at her beck, I wouid brave all ; * yes, every ill, which this world could heap upon me, I wouki endure; every lure ivhich this world could offer I ivould spurn, rather than falsify my eternal allegiance to you. Ah, Helena I does not passion so despotic bribe re¬ turn ? does not a heart so devoted merit some sacrifice ? . Say tben Do more that yoıı will never be mine ; say rather that you pity tbe pangs of faithful love, and that in co-operation with that pity, you will fan thepkadings of sensibility. ¥i Eugenius." " To Eugenius. ** I know not what to say, yet will you await my answer, and sensi¬ bility does indeed plead for you, Oh, my friend ! shall I ovvn Chat I have wept over your letter—that I have perused it, till blinded by tears, each sentence has become mingled, and no impression re¬ mained
mained but grief—grief for that rayless destiny, which involving you in the same irremediable blank, sharpens the barbed arrow wbich has long rankled in my bosom. I ought not to write—I ought not to see you, yet my perverse and wayward feeHngs spum the coun¬ sels of reason, and eaeh "night, in oppo¬ sition as it were to mvself, chains me to the window. You come, and duty slumbers; you whisper love, and the gloom of midnight seems bright as a meridian sun. Alas î iıovv is this strange metamorphosis to be explained? The ordev of my father are unheeded—I who once studied his every wvh, have flow no thought but for a stranger. In vain I trv to resolve m ν feelings, to mould into something like order the wild flights of imagination : the heart is a rebel to judgment and the same list¬ lessness, the same inquietude remains, My life has become a iife of fear—I liave committed no crime, and yet every r '2 eye
eye appears to dive into my secret, and the very domestics seem as spies upon my conduct. I tremble lest my fether should suspect our intercourse, lest he should punish my temerity by banish¬ ing me from his heart and from his home. Holy saints ! tbat fiat would be death. You know not, you cannot even guess the horror which threatens—vain ivould be my prayers and my tears; removed beyond tbereadi of appeal, the lingering years of my future life would dawn and close uncheered by one single ray of promisee -Л should exist without enjoyment *and endure without hope. Ah, my friend ! if you have mercy, let not my father trace even your shadow ; should he see it darken my pathway, I am lost ; should he hear your voice in the night-breeze—should he trace your footsteps on the sward, then, then, Eu¬ genius, the doud which has long lower¬ ed o'er my prospects, bursts and en- gulphs me for ever. This spot will know
know me no more—this home will af¬ ford no more a shelter—I go whither the voice of love cannot penetrate, widther the offices of pity cannot reach. Thb one letter, only this one letter, Euge¬ nius, and I ivrité no more ; receive it as the last effort of temerity : and diould you quit this valley—should you return to tlie world—in distance, in years to come, when on memory my image may have ceased to glow, should recolleetion casually trace tlie Piano di Brolo, feel assured, that amidst its solitude, beats a heart which in life can never be dead to tbe soothing consciousness of your friendship. Helena." " To Helena. " How is it, my siveet Hele¬ na, that you can write of a last letter with composure? AVhere have you acquired, how can you command, such forbearance— such philosophy ? Almost without a struggle you bid me farewell. F İİ hi
In distance, in years to com4! Cold chilling words ! as though I could ex¬ ist in distance, as though í eould linger through years to eonae* shut out from the contemplation of all that my mind pictures perfect. As well may vegeta¬ tion flourish uncheered by the sun's resus¬ citating rays, as for a heart like mine to endure the blank of absence. Helena^ you are my fate, and though death be the threatened penalty, I will woo that fate. One destiny, one interest must be ours. On the step of that altar at w r hicb I first beheld you, I bave sworn never to withdraw my claim, never to relinquish the dear hope of calling you mine, till fatally convinced that, duped by self-love, it is your compassion, and not your heart, I possess. Ah, gracious Heaven, avert a knowledge so destruc¬ tive, a confirmation so direi Helena^ bid me die, but bid me not foiţşet you. BeHeve me, my timid friend, it is your fears which magnify the danger: no parent
parait could be so obdurate: alive to the pleading voice of nature, no parent eould epurn his child, his only child, because, in opposition to his mandate, she dared to be hapjiy. Your domes¬ tics too are not all spies upon your eon- duct I have conversed with Claudine, and much do I mistake if she is not alive to pity. She tells me, as you have fcold me, that Montcalm has quarrelled with his fellow-men: but she knows not the cause, and you withhold it She says it is cniel and unjust to bury so bright a gem in such a wilderness; that she wonders her youthful mistress can submit to such heavy restrictions; that sbe herself would fly imprison¬ ment, but for the love she bears that gentle mistress; that every one shuns Montcalm as a tyrant ; that every one worships his daughter as an angel. Can you wonder, Helena, tbat I too became communicative? that I even acknow¬ ledged the Hebe charms of that daugh· ν 4 ter
ter held me spell-bound in the valley ? (laudine bid me be wary : she spurned not the bribe I slipped into her band. —" There was nought on earth sbe ivould not do to promote the happiness of her mistress, and wás she assured ------" She paused. Can you not guess the rest? Claudine will be our friend. In the ardı smile on her countenance I read an anchor to rest on. She toó knows the witchery of love ; yes, my angel friend, sbe too sooths the eares and sorrows of a confiding heart Na¬ ture has wiselv ordained that the warn- ,·* ing counsels of experience are as nothing to the ear of youth. Claudine imbibes not the chilling philosophy of Mont¬ calm ; she abjures the misanthropic gloom which bars bim from his fellow- creatures; she shuns the dire despon¬ dency of his character ; and though she reads the severity of the bigot, though she shudders at the force of prejudice, tiiough she hears thç threatened de- nouncements
nouncements of wrath, she yet rests up¬ on a point not to be controverted—the omnipotence of nature. Yes, yes, He¬ lena, be our destinies united: become my own past the power to separate, and Montcalm will not be inexorable. Re¬ viving the spring of bis own youth, he will receive us to his heart, and to his arms. It is to you tlien my prayers must be addressed—'tis on you my hopes must rest Be merciful, Helena, and if love e'er Graved compassion, let hira find it at your hands. 44 ECGENIUS."
44 To Helena. * Henceforth Rnd for ever I shall bless that potent taUsman, gold; or rather, I shall bless that pow r er whieh has made me rieh, and made Claudine vulnerable ! Claudine is ail our own : fear not to trust her. Yes, my Helena, she promises to be move than tbe bearer of a letter—she pities us—she will bear e 5 us
ns to each other. Tliis night—tliis veiy night, when Montcalm is at rest, wrap¬ ped in the dark folds of her mantle* you may steal into the garden. I will await you in the arbour. Haste, fly, my angebe friend, and the torch of love will lighten our path—every fear will be hushed, every scruple given to the wind. How shall I watch the flight of day! how shall I haä tiıe blessed shadow of approaching darkness ! How shall I pine to behold you, Helena—- you, the bright sun which chases this world's gloom î Tarry not a moment, my beloved : soon as the signal is given, descend to tbe garden, for not to the eyes of the blind is light more precious than is your presence to the heart of yonr own EugeKius/'
CHAP-
CHAPTER νΠ. Treasuring the precious transcripts of what my heart pictured love, I too watched the envious streaks of day, and saw the burnished ivest gradually fade into gloom, with a sensation which mocked all efforts at composure. I stood at the window—I marked the last tint of glory as it Hngered on the coned point of my favourite rock, and then I sighed, for fancy pictured Eugenius, and expectation sickened at the leadened hours which ivere destined to intervene between me and happiness. My fether saw not my emotion : he stood at my side—he too marked the re¬ fulgence of the setting sun ; md then re¬ verting to his own pecuHar sorrows, and dwelling on tbe vicissitudes of life, he f fi compared
compared the calm close of piety to the dying lustre which spread itself before us. —"Behold, Helena,"calling my attention to what absorbed his every faculty, 4C the calm uncheckered hopes of saintly reli¬ ance ! See, in yon unclouded serenity, the type of vestal faith—the close of an ex¬ istence, unsullied by crime, unvitiated by passion. Ah ! who would brave the turbulence of life's tempestuous oeean— who would forego sueh a close for all that this WOrld ean offer? Would to Heaven," and a shuddering ehill crept over him, " tbe bdng—the—the—" He paused : the name of my mother trembled on his lips—the form of my mother swam before my eyes—yet I spoke not; and when my father resum¬ ed—" Helena, pray for the wanderer," my heart intuitively responded—" May Heaven forgive the injurer, and uphold the injured !" ** Not so," sternly exclaimed my fa¬ ther. íť De Beaufort is the injurer, and the
the curse of Heaven rest on him ! From the cheek of her who was once my wife, I could wipe tlie tear of penitence ; but not tears of blood, distilled from the in¬ most fibres of the heart, eould tempt the grace of pardon for De Beaufort, the bane of fame, the blaster of more than this world's hope, God, avenging God, withhold not thy thunder!" " Alas ! my father," I articulated, 44 would you have me profane the holy rites of worship, by offering up a heart teeming with hatred and revenge ? Oh no, no ! first let me gain the blessed calm of Christian forgiveness, and then------" 44 What tben ?" eagerly intermpted my father. « AVby then," glancing timidly to¬ wards him, " I may confidently petition grace for my own transgressions/' , t My father bent his head in silence— I saw that his cheek flushed crimson, that
Îhat bis fip quivered with internal emc^ tion.— 1 * Iti what have you transgress¬ ed?" he at length demanded, fixing his eyes upon me with a scrutiny which seemed to read my inmost thoughts. 44 Tdl me, Helena," for my conscious heart forbade reply, * 4 what action in your short life presses on уош con*· science 'P' My heart smote me, yet I dared not breathe the name of Eugenius r and witlv an artifice which* my deceived parent took for innocence, I threw mysdf upon his bosom, exclaiming— 44 1 spoke but the language of father Christian." € * You will be a saint in your con* vent," observed my father, forcing a smile. " Yet mark me, Helena, anď treasure in your memory the truth of fatal experience : however the counsels of fether Christian may flow from a meek and pious spirit, there are actions in this worfd which defy the philosophy of
of танм -natittfé 1ηαψ be^etírlfèd, butnit exterrainuted^-l^ésfonTDày bejgovaneå, but not destitiyed. 1 ' I raised my eyes to his, a^ with an emotion ï couid jfrot suppress I artîen- lated-*-" Why Лей shouM I become a nun ? Hear me, my father,^ checking his effort to speak: " if in the hearts of the professed, the «ame passions gender as deface and blacken fhe minds of men -—if the stomas of hatred and corroding malice deepen the deisters gloom,, is- not the search for peace vain and inèffi¬ dent ?" 44 With me it might, but not ivith you, Helena ; no gangrene festers here," laying his spread hand upon his hearts " no poison lurks, defying the reach of antidote. Devoid of oare, you etm lay your head on the pillow and ^leep ; my pillow is strewed With thorns, whidi neither time, or reflection, or philosophy, or fortitude, can e&traet. You go to a calm, a peaceful haven, secured aHke from
from tiıe inroads of temptation or of fraud ; awake but to the offices of devo¬ tion, swayed but by the meek influence of example : reason tempers the hopes, and annihilates the wayward flights of faney. Blessedr thrke blessed be the meek nun's uncheckered path! Like yon Ungering burnish," pointing to the west, 4t the last trembling spark of Hfe emits a softy a transient glory^ whieh impresses, whieh chastens* ivhich exem¬ plifies. Ob, Helena !" and clasping my hand, he looketl imploringly in my face, 44 disappoint not the only hope whieh fate and misfortune have left me" I kissed the cheek of my father, but I ventured not at reply ; and when he pressed me with agonized fervour to his bosom, wben, iu the nightly benison he exdaimed—" The saints and all good angels guard tbe innocent slumbers of my child !" I parted froin him with Eu¬ genius still glowmg in my heart Panting for the wished-for entrance of
of Claudine, I left my door unlatched, and Hstened for her wary footstep with almost breathless expectancy. The still¬ ness of death seemed to reign within our dwelling, and the extinguished light in my father's chamber soon marked the hour for adventure. Claudine eame, and the next moment, equipped to brave the night-breeze, I stole down the passage. I trembled as I passed the door of my unconscious parent, but it ivas with fear, not con¬ trition ; it ivas tbe penalty alone which chased the blood from my cheek, not the conviction of disobedience to his ex¬ press mandate. 44 AVhat a coward !" whispered Clau¬ dine, as 1 started at the blackened sky which seemed to frown on my hardi¬ hood. is Courage ! the signor will guard you tmm every ill." 44 Eugenius," I intuitively pronoun¬ ced, and the next instant every terror was indeed bushed in tbe supporting presence
presence of my lover. Alas ! for a few short hours no world seemed to exist beyond the cottage garden— Eugenius silenced ай my self-reproach—he chased away the tears of apprehension—he call¬ ed on Heaven to witness the chaste fer¬ vour of his vows, spoke of me as the sovereign arbitress of his destiny, and swore that Hfe possessed no eharm un¬ mingled with my image. Too young* too little conversant with man to dream the shadow of design, I listened to the stealing witchery—I reeorded.every syl¬ lable he uttered, treasuring it with a saint's bigotry in the inmost folds of my heart: and when tbe ruddy streaks of morning glowed the dreaded signal for separation, I tore myself with difficulty from him, but not before I renewed my promises of secrecy to the parent who slept unconscious of my apostacy. From that memorable night the bliss¬ ful interviews of love were frequent; Claudine was the active agent, and the heart,
heart, a rebel to the judgment, bound me tiie slave of feeHng. Sentiment and ro¿ mance, those two dangerous foes to rea* son, conspired against me, and I became entangled in a snare whkh superstition weakly urged as wove* by the finger of Fate herself. But though I loved Eu* genius with a love ivhich surpassed tiie love of woman, dung to him as nature clings to life and hope^ ^tiil I breathed not the high title cf Chateauroux, near once unfolded the tale of a mother'« fatal deviation. My father had often cautioned me to bury tbat secret in my own breast, and though I owned no secrets of my own, I respected the soiTows of one parent* and withheld the frailties of the other. Left then to his own conjectures, Eugenius traced the actions of the misanthropist to ca¬ price, and the goadings of disappointed pride : no sojourner in the víilley eould unfold the principles of his pure heart» for even bis charities had been adminis¬ tered
tered through the medium of others and those who partook of his bounty scrupled not to add their own ideas to the vain iand inèffident surmises of others. Such, alas ! are the axioms of the world ! what the eye can't read, the imagination will guess at: characters pure as open day become impeached, and without aim, and without malice, busy rumour wields tbe poisoned shaft of detraction. Dark and ambiguous hints progressively rose and died away in the Piano di Brolo ; Montcalm was called the man of mystery, and I was pitied, because* incompliance with his express wfch, save father Christian, l· feneffltno &ml beyond the cottage..
CHAF-
CHAPTER VIH. And now approaches that period ofmy life, when the fury of an insatiate mob disgraced the name of dvilization— when rebellion, borrowing the garb of patriotism, blotted the fair fame of France, and steeped her lilies, and her glories, in tbe life's blood of her sons. Even to the Piano di Brolo did the wild yell of anarchy extend ; for, as at the earthquake's threatened shock, when each convulsion teems with fate, nature stood aghast, doubtful whom the throes of horror ivould next engulf. Conster¬ nation and dismay spoke in the features ofmy lover: his family were involved; his fame, his property were alike at stake: ruin threatened every hope, de¬ solation and despair menaced his native land,
land, yet love» the master passion of tbe soul, bound him a dave in tbe valley : he dared not brave the pâtıg of absence, and I anticipated each stolen intervieiv as the balm and solace ofmy life. Ignorant of the politics of the world, I felt no dread, because I saw no danger! Sidly still gìowed the lidi garner of treation, and I dteamt not that man, with impious hahd, durée ptofene the sacred inle of order. I smiled at the antici¬ pated ills of Eugenius, and by the soft blandishments òf love, essaved to steal hfe every care. But, aks ! it was not long before I was awakened from my trance of security, not by the impiouà strides of rebellion, not fey the horrid catalogne of sufferance and persecution, but by tbe threatened completion of that fate des¬ tined the grave of every joy. My fether spoke not of the internal convulsions of his country, but the gloom on his brow thickened, and bis visits to tbe hermitage of the holy Christian be¬ came
came more frequent Flom me he hid the rapid progress of anarchy, and not till the hapless Louis was made a prison¬ er in his capital, did he give words to hiá thoughts ; then self yielded to patriotic feeling—tben witb a burst of indigna¬ tion and despair, he declared his inten¬ tion of returning to France, and sacri-· ficing his life's blood in the defence of bis persecuted monarch, " Individual sufferings are nothing»" he exclaimed, as the tears of anguish rolled down his cheeks ; " loyalty and ]>atriotism ought to be tlie first feeHng which warms, and the last feeling whkh expires in the heart of man." I heard him with ealmness-**alas! why ¿hould I seek to bide the frailties of my nature ? I heard him With pleasure— my father absent, and Eugenius might visit the cottage. Holy saints ! how in one Httle moment did I exult in my pro* ject!—how in sanguine thought was every wish fulfilled ! The danger whieh threatened
threatened the being who gave me life was unheeded, and the glow and the smile of rapture,*to any other eye must have betrayed what passed witiiin. My father was tooabsorbed in the fatal storm, whieh rocked theA r ery base of royalty, to note my feelings : his mind had taken wing—it rested with the prisoners in ţlie Temple—it brooded upon the indig¬ nities which disgraced the name of dvi- H^ation, and not till I recalled him to Mmselft did he offer one tribute to na¬ ture; then he'snatched me to his bosom, and then, in accents of convulsive agita¬ tion, he bid me prepare to quit the valley» 44 You will take me with you, my fether ?" I exdaimed ; " you will suffer me to share your fortunes?" He gazed upon me with tearful feel¬ ings.—* 4 No, no, my child; we must part—the walls of Santa Maria di Tin¬ daro will shield your innocence. I go-*- I leave tbis vaUey—perhaps I return no wore—»my arm is feeble, but my heart i«
is firm. Faithful to my vow, one Hele¬ na I will give to Heaven; the other ------" His voice trembled— w had she been chaste, in such a cause I would have quitted paradise." I spoke not—alas ! I could not speak, for the iee*bolt of death seemed to at¬ tend the fiat ; the conflict witiiin was torture; in four days I was to quit the cottage—in four days a Hving grave was to shut me for ever from Eugenius. Scarce conscious of what I did, I stole into the garden ; my brain felt on fire— my feelings were maddened; I ascend¬ ed the rock~~J reached the favourite re¬ treat of my misguided mother; I stood upon the brink of the predpiee—I gazed upon the abyss bdow—" One effort," I articulated, ** and the sense of sorrow will be past-*-one, only one effort, and nature wM be dead within me," I bent forward, and yet I paused upon the fetal leap : the image of my father rose in reproadb—I drew back—I shud- VOL. í. g dered,
dered, and tears, for the first time, stream¬ ed down my colourless cheeks; they felt to relax the frigidity within, to loosen tbe tightened fibres which pressed upon my brain.— 4 * Merciful God!" I exclaimed, i4 with feeHngs like these, dare I approach thy altar ? dare I------" I paused—a fresh burst of tears suc¬ ceeded, and sinkmg upon the bench, and wringing my hands in despair— 4 Oh, Eugenius! Eugenius!" 1 murmured, 44 better had we never met ; thy image, repelling tbe thought of Heaven, must profane the vow of vestal purity— Euge¬ nius ! oh, Eugenius ! not the rites of pro¬ fession, not the chilling garb of Santa Maria di Tindaro, can chase from my heart the hope of its existence." I started—I trembled—I could scarce¬ ly breathe— Eugenius was at my feet! I tried to bury my face in my liands, but he restrained me; he fixed his eyes upon mine—he clasped my hands in his—he raised them to his burning fore¬ head.
head. The pause was impressive^ —the feeHngs of that moment never to be ex¬ punged. 44 The mystery is withdrawn," he at length pronounced ; " the cruel purpose of Montcalm no more a secret. Hear me, Helena, when by the omnipotent Poiver which created me, I swear to avert the doom, or perish ! On my head be hurled all the vengeance of the church, rather than an existence a thou¬ sand times more precious than my own become embittered. Yet speak and tell me all, for love and zeal must plan and execute." 44 Alas !" I faintly articulated, 44 love and zeal can avail me nothing ; my doom is irrevocable—the fiat firm as the seal of destiny : nought is left for me, Euge¬ nius, but to bid you cherish the memory of one whose rash affection is eternal." 44 Yes, much, much is left," eagerly rejoined my lover, gratefully pressing my hands to his lips. 44 Have courage, g 2 Helena *
Helena! crown but my hopfes, and I swear to rob the church of its sweetest offering." I tried to force a smile, but I eould not; for, alas! tiie promised interposition seemed too wild even for hope to cling to ; and when I named the short span ofmy freedom, when I said that in four days I was to quit the valley, the fea¬ tures of Eugenius assumed a east of thought Alive but to the difficulties by which we were surrounded, a mo¬ narch's wrongs, a nation's sufferings, were alike unheeded ; love chased every image but one ; self was the ruKng prin¬ ciple, and we parted with a firm depend¬ enee on each other. I returned to the house—I sought my father, and again did I artfully study to veil the perturbation of my mind. I succeeded: absorbed in the mortal strife whidi wrecked the peace and ho¬ nour of his country, all local ties became secondary, and if for a moment he re¬ verted
verted to himself, if his eye perused the cast of care upon my brow, attributing it to the dread of approaching separation, he strove to reassure me, by inspiring a confidence he eould not feel. 44 Fear not for me, Helena," he ex¬ claimed ; 4ť I go in the cause of duty. 'Tis an awful epoeh in my life, but Hea¬ ven wills that I die not in inactivity. Dry your tears, my child; whilst my arm wields the sword, the prayers ofmy pious nun will petition grace and favour." My tears did flow, for I too felt it was an awful epoeh in my Hfe, There was a solemnity in the voiee and manner oí my father, which reached my heart—it foreboded an eternal separation; and whilst he attempted to explain his in¬ tended arrangements, I could only weep. His purpose was, under the immediate inspection of father Christian, to leave Claudine in charge of the cottage, to de¬ posit me within the monastery of Santa Maria di Tindaro, and then to join the g 3 loyal
loyal band of emigrants assembled tU Coblentz. 44 I once thought I had done with man/' he exclaimed, * 4 but in such a cause, self must be immolated : I burst anew upon the world—I forget my own sorrows in the sufferings of my king, in the bleeding wounds of my country. Oh that every Frenchman would alike rally round the standard of loyalty !— that every heart would alike concentrate aU hopes in one Г *' Hoiv shali I trace your progress ? I sobbed ; " alas ! how shall I know that I have a father ?" 4 * If I live, Helena," he rejoined, " you shdl see rae at the grate of your con¬ vent ; if I die, we shaU meet, I trust, in Heaven. Pray for our arms, my child : in the matin, in the vesper hour, my 4 mind's eye' wiU follow you to the altar. Pray for your king—pray for your father—pray for that calm serenity which the supplkations of innocence fail not to produce f
produce ! Domestic eares will not гаек my bosom; the turmoils of war will efface the past; and for the present you will be in safety, and the holy Christian will transmit all that it may import you to hear." 44 AA r herefore doom me to the convent?" I exclaimed, and new r hope gave energy to my feeHngs; ** wherefore banish ще from home, ivhen, under the guidance Ш father Christian, I might tarry here, and hail the first blessed intimation of your safety? Think, my father," checking his effort to speak, * 4 how many hours must be spent in journeying from hence to Santa Alaria di Tindaro. Father Christian is infirm—he needs rest and quiet ; ivhy r then assign him an exertion which threatens the overthrow of both ? He------" " Your fears for our pious friend are misplaced, Helena," interrupting me. " Father Christian undertakes my tem¬ porary concerns : for the transmission of g 4 intelligence,
intelligenee, a messenger may be found, more active though not more zealous. In confiding you to the mother-superior of Santa Maria di Tindaro, I secure to you a friend, and an asylum, in one, to mitigate your anxieties, and to protect you from every danger. She will teach you how to meet those trials which Hea¬ ven may will you to endure—sbe will win Щиг heart from the perishable ties of this world, and gradually and imperceptibly implant that meek assurance, that saered reliance, which neither time nor drcum¬ stances ean subjugate or destroy. Should I return ere the months of your noviciate be passed, I will bless the holy rites of profession ; should I be dead to the fading glories of mortality, bear in mind, that the last lingering moment of existence will have been gilded by the conviction that you are placed beyond the reach of temptation." I shuddered—I raised my tearful eyes to his fiice —" Oh, my father !" I sobbed out,
out, in accents broken and disjointed, 44 for ever must I quit my home— fot ever must I be torn from the scenes of earliest remembrance—from all that e'er claimed my heart and my feelings—from you," throwing myself upon his bosom— 44 from this peaceful valby ? Must I be exiled among strangers, with no face to recognize, no haunt to sooth ? Oh, spare me ! spare me ! and at least award the melancholy satisfaction of retracing your footsteps. Father Christian shall be my guide—the matin, the vesper hour, in his hermitage, shall pass in prayer for your safety." 44 Impossible f exclaimed my father, kissing away the tears which streamed down my cheeks ; " urge not an exp^ dient, so wild, so impracticable. I trem¬ ble not for your probity, but for your inexperience i for though the arch of heaven be not more open thau your ac¬ tions*« still, stiU, my child, I dare not trust you. At the convent, ia every β d faee
face you may seek a friend. 'Tis true, ï place you beyond the reach of the haunts of your infancy; but local attach¬ ments are weak, and must yield to ne¬ cessity. Dry your tears ; I only ask to see you resigned, and to the guidance of Heaven we must commit the future. In joy or woe, in success or defeat, in prosperity or endurance, rest assured you will live in my heart ; and the dearest reward I can reap from exertion will be to transmit to you a faithful journal of my movements : your filial anxiety shall never be neglected ; memory will point to you as the only vivifying ray whkh checkers the dark horizon of my fete. Think then of the draft upon my fortitude, and try at least to act the he¬ roine." My father strove to set me an exam¬ ple of cheerfulness, but he was a wretched counterfeit, and often relaxed into his usual habit rf thought. I too w r as in¬ capable of exertion, and when we parted fot
for the night, I felt that depression of spirits whkh seems to forebode unguess- ed-at ill. Disappointment and endur¬ ance shrouded every hope I had pictured, and Eugenius rose to view but to make the pang more bitter. 44 Alas ! wbat in this life is there be¬ yond misery and sufferance?" I articu¬ lated, as, softly opening the easement, I gazed upon tbe fairy scenes below. 44 Like the shadoivs which flee before the face of morning, man sports his pigmy span, and is seen no more ; he sojourn- eth as it were for a season, and almost with his presence does his remembrance fade : creation wears the same aspect, the sun shines with the same lustre, whe¬ ther it gilds his bridebed or his tomb. In four short days, when banished the peaceful scenes of my childhood, this valley wiU look as lovely, its pastures as fruitful, its hills, its „woods, as verdant, its stream as pellucid ; the same cloudless sky will be its canopy, whilst I——" g 6 The
The reflection was too morønful-^I eould only bury my fece in roy hand& and weep at the dreamy pkture of priva¬ tion which prejudiced feney conjured. I saw Myself entombed vvithout a hope of respite, and all the warm energies of roy nature nipped by a chilling frost. " Holy Viilsin?* I aspirated, «· eaç duty urge a sacrifiée so irremediable ?w can parental authority warrant a decree so coercive? No, no,* and ray rebellious heart throbbed almost to bursting, 4t the Divine Author of our being wills the eontrol, not annihilation, of feeHng; he gives reason to temporize, not subvert, and sensi biHty, that sweetest of all attri¬ butes, to bless, not curse hie creature«." Absorbed in melancholy reflection, I noticed not the stelen approach of Clau¬ dine, and when in silence she held forth the written talieman of fove, I snatched It tomy bosom, as tiiough it teemed with comfort and with safety. I paused not for thought, but almost before she had glided
glided from the chamber, broke the wal and blessed the efforts of aifection :— " Prešove уошг spirits, my Helens and let Ibe convent of Santa Maria di Tindaro fede away like a fearful dream : I am labouring fot your emancipation. The hour which gives you bo freedom wffl be the brightest hour of my Ше; but the bonds of thraldom must alow be ex¬ changed, шу gentie love, and tbe rites of mamage supersede tiie threatened slavery of tho chnrch. Soft and Kght are the rosy fetters of transporting pas¬ sion ; 'tis a bondage whieh the heart does not shrink from, whkh the aoul would not exchange for liberty— э* bondage whkh, once felt, should be eternal ! Yon have taught me the true aim and nature ofmy being—you have taught me how to love : Helena, complete the blessing, give me yourself, and though rocked hy the storma of empires, fete may wound, but cannot subdue me, No sway but your own could kt these timei of peril withhold
withhold me from my country : France is deluged in blood—slie eiaves the suc¬ cour of every loyal son, and yet I linger. RebelHon profanes the sanettmrv of ma¬ jesty ; the king is ^prisoner in ius capi¬ tal; the distant provinces revolting from their allegiance; the whole nation in arms, yet dare I not fly to the standard of my prince : no, not if my w f hole family were exterminated, not if the home of my heritage blazed in one shapeless pile, eould I leave you a prey to the wild en¬ thusiasm of Montcalm. AVhat further proof can I give of my adoration ? He¬ lena, if you beeome the passive victim of bigotry, I will hover around your prison -i**I wiU exist beneath the walls of your corivent? my family may mourn me as dead—my country may brand me as an alien and á coward : hope will be dead in my heart, and without hope what is life?- Yet wherefore this strain of de¬ spondency? Helena, you must hear me—you must be mine; your eyes have told
told me so a thousand times, and your smile has fanned me to exertion. This night, when anxiety and aching thought shall have wooed the calm of forgetftrl- ness, when your eyelids shall be sealed in the sweet slumbers of innocence, I will be wakeful—I will be active for our se¬ curity. Four days is alone given us: the period is short—the step must be decisive ; we must act, not parley. Yield me the reins, and never shall the veil of profession shroud your brow. Fear not; be my arms your lawful shelter, and my affection your rock of strength. At the turn of to-morrow's midnight, descend with Claudine to the garden ; rely im¬ plicitly on her, and ere we part, my own, my matehless Helena, Montcalm and the world may be alike defied. " Eugenius." " My father ! my poor father ť' I fel¬ tered, as the last effort of duty strove at my heart The stand, alas ! was feeble, and the rebellious, the cursed «pirit of independence
independence expunged the lingering virtue: again I dared to question the right of parental authority, and again I became the dupe of my own feelings, —Eugenius rose to viewwl kissed the insidious paper, buried it in my bosom, and sank to eleep with the writer h» my he*ri
CHAPTER IX *Лш day ofmy ill-starred marriage roşe prophétie? dark vapours roiled along the sky ; the moaning blast ruffled the pellucid bed erf the San A$gdo, and not one vivifying ray did the sun emiwOb no! sombre as my fete, it seemed to na¬ ture's self fc day of mourning ; my heart felt to dk in my fcrøsom* yet the smile m щу tø>w waa unvaried, and when ^brisking foto tbe рг^еше of my fa¬ ther.
then the cast of moody care ebased eve*fy other impression. Claudine failed not to curb the gnrw- 'mg influence by her Hgfait and ceaseless banter : the impervious walls of a con¬ vent shrouded the fairy tissue of bliss, aöd the blushing bride of the expectant Eugenius became quiek metamorphosed into a pale novice of Santa Maria di Тнь darò. 44 Holy saints, avert the aimiliilating change!" 1 ejaculated. 44 Not the saints, lady," archly re¬ joined Claudine* 44 but your own ex¬ ertions. Think what will be the feel¬ ings of the signor when be beholds, his worshipped bride transformed into thie emblem of misery's self; wlien he sees reluctance and bare acquiescence super¬ sede the promised dawn of love, ajad hope, and eonßdenee. The signor røs* rits a heart that knows no division; tkß signe r им, " 44 Hush, hush, Claudine !" interwptiög her,
her, "you know not the heart you tax : it owns no division—it loves Eugenius with a love almost idolatrous, yet does it mourn the disappointed hopes of my hapless father." ** The hopes of the signor Montcalm should have had a more rational founda¬ tion," rejoined Claudine ; ťť nor, because he had forgotten the hopes of his own youth, should he have sought to have annihilated the hopes of bis child." I forced a smile, but I could not feel myself a convert to such doctrine ; I knew the secret gangrene which festered on those hopes—I knew the buried mine whkh had turned to bitterness the onee-teeming promises of bliss. Afflic¬ tion grounded the misanthropic princi¬ ples ofmy parent ; injuries the most dire had shut his heart to the advances of his fellow-men, and even though I saw myself the threatened victim of his pre¬ judices, my Hps could not join in his condemnation. Claudine
Claudine watched the quick variations of my countenance, and ivhen tears of dawning repentance chased each other down my cheeks, in a tone of pique she pronounced—" A precious prelude for a bridegroom ! What though I caU the signor Montcalm, confess our sins, and expiate the past in tbe convent ?" " Bear with me, Claudine," I sobbed ; 4i alas ! you know not what passes in my heart. Even Eugenius would not reprove those tears which record the blasted hopes ofmy father. Think, when he shall hear the new barrier which for¬ bids my taking the vows ; when------" 46 Rather think," interrupting me, " of the blissful chance which snatches you from profession—think of the years of anguish you eseape, and the happy contrast whieh spreads itself before you. Come, smile, my sweet mistress ! Who can say this may not prove the brightest day inyour life?" The call of my father checked« any further
further discourse, and when I descended to his study, I saw, or fancied I saw, a more than usual paleness o'erspread his cheeks ; his arms were folded upon his breast, and he paced the apartment in evident absorption. Pausing and gaz¬ ing on me—" Time advances," he said, 44 and the last preparations are painful ; yet, my child, circumstances demand it of us, and resolution must be taxed— alas ! 'tis not the first time in my life that resolution has been taxed even to agony. The enterprise in which 1 am about to embark is more than h°xard- ous : should I fall ------ " He paused, for my tears streamed unchecked—" Helena, you are no heroine," forcing a smile; 44 courage, girl ! remember, self should be immolated at ihe shrine of patriotism, for every loyal feebng points to exertion." 44 And yet I could have wished," I Mtered, 4ť that the din of anarchy had not reached our valley, that unknowing and unknown, we had been left to Uve and
and die in obscurity. What can the might and prowess of one single arm achieve? Oh, my father! thousands will rally round the throne, and prop the felling strength, whilst you " I shuddered^—1 hung my bead upon my bosom, for tbe expression of his eye was almost petrifying.— 4 * Spirit of my fathers !" he ejaculated, " is it the de¬ scendant of a Chateauroux who thus so coldly argues? wbo, Hving alone for self, would purchase safety even at the price of honour? Is it—" 44 Forgive me ! oh, forgive me !" in¬ terrupting him, ** nor chide the weak¬ ness of affection. Cradled as I have been in the lap of peace, wonder not though my heart shrink at the threat of peril." 44 Enough, Helena," extending his hand ; " the timid heart of woman re¬ solves* the seeming degeneracy : your prayers be all we need—the rest to Hea¬ ven, and man's exertion. Are you pre¬ pared
pared to-morrow's dawn to quit the val¬ ley?" 44 To-morrow !" fearfully. ** Yes, to-morrow. Safe within your holy sanctuary, every sense of danger slumbers: then will I away to the stan¬ dard ofmy prince, nor shrink from death and all his threatened terrors. I eould wish the trial over," he continued, in a softened voice : 4t aid me, my child, for not till then can I throw off the father. Courage, Helena! thmk of the cause whieh calls me hence, and banish every selfish sign of sorrow. Be patriotism our spur to action," he continued, vainly striving to check the torrent of his own tears; then struggUng against a half sob —" God bless my girl !" He led me to the door—he tried again to speak, but he could not ; with a desperate effort he tore himself from my embrace, and pushing me itXt% the passage, slammed to the door, as though doubtful of his own strength. AVild
Wild and complex were my feelings —I leant against the side of the passage —I listened to the deep sobs of my fether : one moment my heart was sof¬ tened, the next, presenting the image of Eugenius, nerved it 'gainst nature and gainst nature's pleadings.— 4I The hour for decision, the hour for exertion, is arrived," I murmured, as I fled to my own chamber ; " Nature herself conspires against me—my father urges; hence¬ forth, Eugenius, be thou my fate." I drew his last letter from my bosom ; with maddened feeHng I pressed it to my lips, and to my heart—I sucked the dear ddusive poison—I read and re-read the fatal signet of appointment—I pant¬ ed for the signal—I watdied the slow decHne of day—I hailed the advance of darkness, and saw the mingUng face of earth and heaven, with a sensation al¬ most amounting to rapture. The hour of midnight came; the slow reverberating dock struck like a death- knell
kifcft шшу mt ; ï shudåered-l gasp- ëdfor%reath ; with the ^apeless incon- si^emy of human nature, my heart seemed again to ding to my father, and a passion of tears deluged my cheeks. I saw him enfeebled, helpless—-1 heard the bitter curse ď outraged feeling, his hands raised to heaven, his lips breath¬ ing imprecations on his child. Why- why did I not follow the feebte endte- ments of duty ? Holy saints ! what had been the vestal shroud of Santa Maria di Tindaro compared to the horrors of my lot ! Short was the conffiet~!ove again triumphed,—" Never, never, can I re¬ nounce thee, Eugenias," I sobbed, clasp¬ ing my hands in agony*—·** never try to forget thee—never wish by thee to be fcrgcrtten~*-Oh no! never rob my eyes of their cherished pleasure—never rob my soul of its fondest hope." The signal was given ; Claudine stole into my chamber; she spoke not, but qukkly throwing over me a long man¬ tle,
tie, she beckoned down the passage. We descended the stairs; the grave's stillness seemed bo reign, for I could al¬ most distinguish the fearful throbbings of my own heart The outer door was already unbarred; no sound betrayed our departure : I quitted the home of my infancy, and in a few flitting mo¬ ments was folded to the bosom of my lover. Precious to my soul were the whispered transports of his gratitude; quick did they expunge every vestige of regret, and chain me the willing slave to his guidance.— u Helena, idol of a fond and faithful heart !" he murmured ; then, quickly upholding the trembling form which hung upon him— 41 Courage, courage, my life ! the priest awaits, and Heaven sanctions the rights of love and nature!" He raised me in his arms—he clasped me to the only heart whieh mine had ever throbbed for, and with a tread vol. ι. η which
whkh danger rendered cautious, be fler through the garden, nor paused «till hc had gained tiie banks of the San Ange« io; then softly relinquishing his burden, he blew a shrill and lengthened whistle; the splash of an oar succeeded, and, al¬ most with the rapidity of enchantment, a little boat emerged from the deep sha¬ dow of the opposite trees. 1 started, and when my eye sought explanation, I traced an arch smile on tiie features of Eugenius. Perhaps 'twas doubt which mingled with hesitation—I drew back —I turned intuitively to the dwelling of my father : the cottage was hid from view, but tho dark outline of my fa¬ vourite roek caught tiie soft tissue of the moonbeams. 44 What can you fear ? n interrogated Claudine. Eugenius spoke nob, but throwing his arm round my waist, tried to impel me forward. * * I dare
44 1 dare not—cannot go¿" I faltered. ·« Oh, Eugenius ! what mystery is this» Where-~where would yoia take røe?" * * 4 Far ftom Santa Maria di Tindepøw* \щ replied, in a voice scarcely articulate* *' Helena, your doubts аш scorpion* stings ; name the guarantee of honour, and I die to prove it." Alas ! how eould I find words for my feehngs?—what could I name? Tremf biing, almost gassing, my head aimk upon his shoulder; he ufted me from the earth—he sprung with me into Йш boat, and when I raised my head, my eyes in vain sought the outiine of fe- miliar images; the jutting rock had re¬ ceded, and the farthest limits of my early rambles were left far behind. Again my bead drooped upon the shoul¬ der of my lover, and his every endearing whisper was answered by a sob. Claudine argued, but I heeded her not ; the sensation at my heart was almost suffocating : a second time was the blow H 2 aimed
aimed at the heart of Montcalm—and by whom ? Alas ! by one who ought to have expunged with tears of blood the frailties of her mother. To all the •oft blandishments of love, sighs were the sad responses; nor till Eugenhis, subdued by my agony, promised, when the rites of marriage had sanctified our vows, to reconvey me to my parent, did the hysteric violence of my feelings subside; then I felt to compromise with my consdence, for then the crime of actual desertion eould not be adduced against me. Armed to oppose the pos¬ sibility of compelled profession, I felt a giant's strength ; nature would give elo¬ quence to my pleadings, and to confess the lapse of duty, to acknowledge my¬ self a wife, was better than to sharpen the sting of disobedience by the bitter aggravation of cruelty and ingratitude. Such was the dream of mental reser¬ vation—such the sophistry which, lull¬ ing self-reproach, supported ще to the step
step of the altar. Trembling I clung to the arm of my love, for the stilly gloom of the hour, the deathlike solemnity of the plaee, chased every vestige of colour from my cheeks, leaving them as cold and as bloodless as the marble upon which I rested. The faint light which gleamed frøm the altar pierced not the shadow of the aisles; it fell upon the lank visage of the officiating priest; it imparted an expression almost spectral. Again my courage misgave me, and again the tears started to my eyes. In vain Eugenius, in vain Claudine, whispered composure; a dread of unknown ill pressed upon my spirits ; and when the ring glittered upon my finger, when the last exordi¬ um closed, life and recollection dosed with it : the priest, the altar, Eugenius himself, receded from my sight, and the icy torpor of apparent death numbed the warm energies of nature. The dis- traction, the wild agony of my lover, η 3 recalled
ifcörikd Äit to myself; his tears fell up¬ on my bo^m^-his sighs awakened the languid p&wefë of animation ; I looked up -Л saw nothing in the creation but himself-~I felt nothing but the throb of his feithful heart. He clasped me closer to that heart, and ivhen faintly I urged the promised restoration to my fether, he sighed, imt he attempted not to op¬ pose my wishes. Supporting me in his mmê f he conveyed me to the boat, and Secure in the hallowed shelter of wedded love, my head resting on his shoulder, and Claudine stationed at my side, we glided softly down the stream. u My own Helena !" murmured Eu¬ genius, as we traced the outline of my favourite rock, capped in the misty grey of mormng. It frowned o'er the bed of theriyer; I closed my eyes against it —it seemed as the signal for worse than death—for separation» 44 Why muit we part ?" pursued Eu¬ genius, fraring the struggle of my feel¬ ings.
ings. " Heaven has made us one, and duty cannot warrant such a sacrifice." I did not—I could not spedi; the boat was moored to the shore, and still I clung to the bosom of my husband. 44 No, no," he continued, " I cannot, will not leave you ; I will stay—I will defend my bride against the prerogative of a fetheťs power. Nay, do not trem¬ ble, my gentle love, for what is his right to mine ? I will brave all his rage, all his resentment, but never will I lose sight of his angel-child." 44 Confide in my strength, Eugenius," I articulated, struggling to recover self- command ; * ť I will go to my fether—1 will kneel at his feet—I will confers the tie which binds us ; then if he spun) me, I will fly to m v lawful shelter, and fór ever submit myself to your guid¬ ance " 44 If the signor should tear you hence/ fearfully observed Claudine ; " if by η 4 force
force he should convey you to the con- vent ; think if he ------" 44 He cannot, he dare not," interrupt¬ ed Eugenius, and his whole soul was in his eyes. 44 Not once will I lose sight of yon dwelling—I will hover round my treasure, and but in death will yield it. Go, then, Helena, perform the hard task of duty ; and whilst you supplicate tiie mercy of your fether, know that anxiety tortures the mind of your hus¬ band." Again he folded me to his heart, then -lifting me from the boat, with a thou¬ sand fond and tender cautions, confided me to the care of Claudine.
CHAP-
CHAPTER X. With slow and reluctant steps I ap¬ proached our dwelling, my mind agitated, my feelings cruelly oppressed ; now strug¬ gling with the aimosWerwhelming tide of tenderness, and now rallying every particle of courage to meet tbe coming conflict. Often did I turn, often did my lingering eye seek the towering figure of my love. He was stationed on the bank of the San Angelo ; he was watch¬ ing my movements, with a fondness, as anxious, and as ardent as my own ; and ivhen I reached the door, when I waved my hand in adieu, still did he preserve his station—still, as he had promised, did he tarry to protect his bride. The blue mists of dawn were dispersed ; the broad eye of day glared upon us : the woods, Η 5 the
the mountains, and the river, were no longer mingled, yet still was the interior of the cottage silent as tbe trance of death. I reached my chamber—I sat panting with expectation—my father eame not, sent not, and hour after hour succeeded the one appointed for depar¬ ture without resolving tbe delay. Alarmed, yet unable to give form or colour to my fears, I stole into tbe pas¬ sage : a faint groan readied my ear ; an¬ other succeeded ; it seemed as the part¬ ing struggle of mortality, as the last agonizing throe of dissolving nature. Lost alike to reflection and self-com¬ mand, I rushed into the chamber of my faiher; scarcely breathing, I sprung to the bed—-I drew aside the curtain. What ti sight met my view ! my father was dressed, but he still lay upon the bed, his eyes closed, and his features frightfully distorted. My wild shrieks of mingled terror and distraction soon summoned Claudine and tbe other do¬ mestics,
»mesties, and whilst they fled to the her mitage of father Christian, I watched and wept over tbe sufferer. Oh, how did eousdefice rise against me, as I chafed his lifeless hands, and prayed for return¬ ing animation; as I watered his wan cheek with mv tears, and called on Hea- ven to hear and to aid me ! Even Eu¬ genius was fbrgotten^—nature clung to her earliest tie, and to have redeemed his life, my own had been joyfully relin¬ quished. Still insensible to my agony, my father lay ; no sigh, no groan escaped him : sometimes a slight convulsion pass¬ ed over his features, then again were they cold and wan, as though marbled by the shaft of death. Goaded by self reproach almost to madness, I pereeived not the entrance of father Christian, nor eould his sage ex- ordiums compose my feelings. Horror- struck, I clung to the parent I had in¬ jured, vowing no force, no persuasion, should part me from him—I would tend и 6 him
him in every extremity; forgetful of self, I would support, I would aid in every application. The good hermit opposed me not: there was no time fijr delay: the arms and tiie temples were cut, and though with wild gratitude, I watched the slow-dropping blood which followed the lancet, still the weakness of nature was pre-eminent, for feinting, I sunk under my burden. On recovering, I found myself in my own chamber, and for the moment all gave plaee to trans¬ port, for I was upheld in the arms of Eugenius. A burst of tears sueceeded ; he encouraged those tears—bis own mingled with them ; he talked of my fa¬ ther, of all whieh could soften my heart, and soon was the heavy load which press¬ ed upon it lightened. Aided by Claudine, Eugenius conti¬ nued hid in the cottage, and my hours were passed alternately with my father and my love. Ah ! to have exchanged those hours for years—to have Hved and died
died in sueh a state of blessedness ! But it could not be: my father slowly recover¬ ed, and Eugenius was banished our dwdiing. Our meetings were again the meetings of stealth, for danger and diffi¬ culty marked each interview; but Clau¬ dine assisted our hopes, and forgetful of all the world beside, often did the morn¬ ing sun glare on the quick retreat of my husband. He urged for explanation ; yet still I hesitated, for though, in the gradual restoration of health, my fether still dwelt on the convent, when I marked his wan cheek, and traced the languor of his melancholy eye, I could not utter the tale which rose to my Hps—I could not bl t his hopes, and doom him again to the brink of that grave from which he had so newly arisen. Fresh intelligence from France soon renerved the breast of patriotism : the languid pulsee at the ^heart quickened ; the almost-paralyzed powers of energetic exertion relumed. Listening to each wild
wild rumour, my fether forswore the cold misanthropy Jof his character ; he sought the haunta of men—he visited the little fortrees dii Brolo» frowning on the op¬ posite heights^-hé mingled amidst the busy groups wbo weigh the rise and fall of nations—«he gleaned each tale of hor¬ ror* and cursed, in the bitterness of his feelings, tbat country which had given him birth. Alas! devastation still raged in the capital: under the plea of patriotism, her citizens were butchered, and the minds of the people fermented by the most nefarious artifices; ruffian emissa¬ ries of jacobin dubs usurped the title of executive power, and every falsehood which could alarm, inflame, and agitate the populace, were circulated and be¬ lieved. . Nightly did the dreadful tocsin sound the signal for slaughter, and daily was the earth saturated with blood : eon- vents, hospitals, and prisons, were alike devastated; sacrilege and, profanation overthrew
overthrew the altars and Entope viewed with dismay tbe strides Of human depra- vity* The movements df tim allied ar¬ mies too were not so vigorous as san¬ guine hope had pictured;, for though Frederick AVilliam of Prussia, and the duke of Brunswick, nominally suppoited tbe French princes, though Longwy, Verdun, Grandprè, and Croix*aux-bois, had successively yielded, to their arms, still their policy was at best doubtful, and. tbe situation of the unfortunate emigrants teeming with mortification and danger. The royal family were still closely guarded, and tbeir lives hourly menaced by an infuriate mob. The in¬ nocent princess de Lamballe had paid the prki£ of life for her heroism, or perhaps to goad the feelings of the hapless queen : dragged to the Temple, her remains bar¬ barously outraged, her heart and her head bad been displayed amidst the shouts of demons. " Avenging powers 1" murmured my father.
father, Пеап these be men Ρ Tortured by these horrible rumours, and strug¬ gling 'gainst the lagging weakness of in¬ disposition, he pined to add his ann to the loyal band-—to share the risk and dangers of his countrymen— to save the tottering throne, or perish 'midst the wreck. Again he spoke of his depar¬ ture from Sidly, and again tbe day, the hour, was fixed for my removal to Santa Maria di Tindaro. We were pacing the garden, my fether expatiating upon the common cause, my secret hanging untold upon my lips : the moment for exertion was almost arrived, yet still my coward heart misgave me ; I knew not how to shape the tale of disobedience, and with that indecision which fear and doubt produce, resolved once more to see Eu¬ genius, and to yield myself to his direc¬ tion. On entering the house, Claudine glanced significantly towards me: my feelings were in arms: hope and fear preserved
{»reserved an equal balance. My father retired to his study, and speecbkss, gasp¬ ing, I flew for explanation. 44 1 know not what ails the signor," said Claudine; " he looks all care and sorrow." I was disappointed ; it was of Euge¬ nius, not my father, I wislied to speak. Claudine deciphered my feefingst; she smiled as she drew a note from her poc¬ ket—I snatched it from her—I tore it hastily open : again my features fell, for apprehension and dismay were alike ex¬ cited. 4è The dream of peace is past," wrote Eugenius. ** This night, my love, my Helena, meet me in the arbour," 44 Tell me, tell me, Claudine, what have I to dread?" grasping her arm, and gazing fearfully in her face, t* 44 I know not," said Claudine, 4S but the young signor, the signor Eugenius, looks as though the dream of peace was indeed passed. Since morning bm be been
been h&Yering^afeoufc the cottage, and when he gav« me that note s he^éaid, * more than life hong upon punctuality/ I tried to question, but he eould not stay ; Ms spirits were agitated,iife cheek pale, and his brows knit; he looked fcr all the world as if some great cala¬ mity-—But you trembfe-¿— -" 44 Proceed, Claudine, I am well, quite wdl," smothering the sob whieh rose al¬ most bo suffocation, and then turning to the window, I gasped for air. " I dare swear," pursued Claudine, 44 the same cause produces the same in¬ quietude. My master talks of patriot¬ ism till'he scorns his own safety, and doubtless* the signor must leave his bride to go to France." I started—I shuddered—^a thousand terrors rose in array before me, and to all the soothing arguments of Claudine, I could* offlý^reep.' It w$k lohg ere I eould regain composure, ere 1 could áiasé : my s tears, ând f meet my fether: calamity
calamity iti a new form threatened; mid when again he spokeof the bloody strictes of revolutionary frensy* whai lie dwelt on the erime« md horrors of devoted France, I felt it ás a dagger's poftit at my heart Assuming what I could not feel, the smile of peace, for the last time I knelt for the benison of my fethet. Thrice he blessed me, «flrd tbrke he folded me in his arms; he dalled me bis deur, his innocent child, ahd when I reached the door, again his lips pronounced good¬ night, and again his anns expanded. I sprung into them—I sunk subdued and sobbing on his bosom. He kissed *my cheeks and forehead ; then bidding me pray forthe injured, dismissed me s ashe thought, to repose. Alas ! repose weighed not down my eyelids—-repose awaited ndt my heart ; I had frightehed repose; for though" tìs Rousseau expresses it—" Thè punga of sorrow, the attacks of misfortune, î^sţieet the hour of repose, гетш forbid« that necessary
necessary restoration." With the kiss tf toy deceived parent still warm upon my Kps, I descended to the garden. The moon rose in all her majesty, but the air was chilly ; I drew my doak over my bosom, and followed by Claudine, fled to the arbour. Eilgenius awaited me at the entrance—he strained me with fervour to his breast—he thanked, he blessed me, he called me liis own Hele¬ na,! hi» best love, his worshipped bride; J9^t there was an agitation, a perplexity in his manner, whieh alarmed me : his feoe was flushed, and his hand trembled as I clasped it. " Speak, in merey speak, Eugenius !" I articulated ; *' tell me the threatened mischief, for sure no common ill pro¬ duces an emotion so apparent?" He sank upon the bench—he drew me fondly towards him—** Helena," he whispered, passing his burning cheek tomy oold one, " do you love me?" For a moment I gazed on him in sU . ,. lence:
lence; speech, power, were suspended ; and not till he again whispered—*** Do you love me?" could I find words.-» " Tax me, Eugenius," I solemnly pro¬ nounced, " then tell me where my love fails." * 4 No, no, my angel girl !" he murmur¬ ed, " I doubt not your love ; but have you courage, have you resolution, to brave danger, to encounter peril ? He¬ lena, my own Helena, will you shave the hardships of a soldier's fortune? will you smile at the pelting stonn? and, pil¬ lowing your head on my bosom, will you sleep beneath the chilling canopy of heaven? This night, this very night, I leave this vale of Tempe: will you share my flight? or doom me to a ba¬ nishment worse than death ?" 44 This night, Eugenius?" ** This night, Helena. The moon shines upon the project—it chides delay: my companions in arms await me—wego, we fly, to avenge the fall of thousands." I shuddered—
Ivìbuddere<l— I folded røy hands m щфлул.тту fe*r seemed realized ρ sea« of blood floated before my eyes, images oft»orm$m№ tø tqrrøe^t me,-^ te .»Virgin MoEberJ' Д ^acMtoted, trying in every feature the glowing energy of his soul, 44 ^Ь^«^1^-Йн$ very nigbt ; my fether, HPffi ľ i M ' 11 1 J ' * * , Hp^natebed tbe trembling coward to Ьщ hearf^-be kps^aw r ay the balf-finislb eå$mtmw« - о " giv* ŕ it Ycţ^ fesier would immure you ia tb^ íi^iveiifc" he exdaimed, " I would ensbitee yon m m§r &wn breast. Hele¬ na, my worshipped wife, can уош be bo!d?*-^an you s^umethe hero?i I would journey with my treasure, yet ой$егЛ%е, would iti hid^ its rare, its matehless value. I would transport yon to a place of safety, thert? depositing you mJ^sm^ed charge of, my famüy, my heart my feelings, will be braced to deeds of valour/' j · .. f * " ¥>My
, " My fether!" l щат trerøbHngly pronounced« " Your father would tear yoi& from me/ resumed Eugemus: "-forgetful of the days of pagsion, bewould Ы1 it vir¬ tue to blast our hopes. Has he not doomed you to a life of privation ? has he not resisted every appeal to pity? Say tben, my life, my love, how can I leave you to his guidance?" " Leave me !" I repeated: " oh no, no !" iind I dung tighter to the arm* of my husbaiid. *' Never," exclaimed Eugenius, with a vehemence whkh made røe start, " toever till death freezes m v heart's blood, will I part from thee ! one fate, one destiny, be ours! Helena, will you not seal the compact?" 1 spokenot,but l·pressed hk hand in acquiescence : every duty was absorbed in one; vera though ^my thought» still bent upon my father, my actions andsny feelings were Eugenius's. 44 Depending
44 Depending upon your affection, I came prepared," rejoined my husband. 44 Claudine, assist your lady. Here is a vest to hide the matehless graces of her person, and sure this cap will fillet the wild redundance of her raven hair." 44 What, man's attire !" I faltered, and the blush of outraged modesty burnt upon my cheek. 44 Only for a little season," pursued the tempter ; 44 1 would screen you from the loose unhallowed gaze of licensed admiration. In times like these, Hele¬ na, safety must be studied, 4 for beauty pmvoketh thieves sooner than gold." Be quick, my gentle bride ! already do my friends await me at Messina." In vain Eugenius urged—the preju¬ dices of early habit rose in strong oppo¬ sition, nor till I found his safety might be threatened, could I assume a disguise so repugnant to my feelings : even then I positively insisted upon making my toilette in my own chamber, and though his
his acquiescence was reluctant, I flew in baste to claim it Behold me then once more within the cottage, Claudine encouraging, my own heart upbraiding me; reviewing the events of my short Hie, and weigh¬ ing for the first time the step I was about to take. How in one Httle mo¬ ment did I fall from the summit of hap¬ piness I had newly created ! a wanderer from my native home, disguised, jour¬ neying with a being, whose name, whose family, vvhose connexions, I knew not Holy Virgin ! how did my heart, my principles, condemn me! But 1 was a wife—I bad relinquished the reins of my own actions—the faultless image, the romantic tenderness of Eugenius, rose to view* and love, almighty love, urged too strong to be resisted. The guileless in¬ experience of youth, too, combined witb an enthusiastic mind, and my lover stood acquitted of all but what rendered bim dearer, the ardour of unbounded affection. vol. ι. ι 1 started
1 started as I viewed my own figure in the glass : Claudine smiled, but a scalding tear fell upon my cheek ; that smile ill became the hour of separation, and shuddering, I felt as though she had betrayed me. I know not wliether my look was eloquent, but her face crimson¬ ed, and instantly did she stammer out the promise oť Eugenius to summon her, as soon as I should be settled in my new home. Some loose gravel thrown at the window spuke the impatience of my lover, Claudine urged departure, but still my father clung to my heart—. I biiutdied a pencil, and with an un¬ steady bund, scravv led the following lines :
44 The child who dares rebel against your wishes, dares also crave for¬ giveness. Urged on by a passion which has mingled with her being, the destined nun of Santi Maria di Tindaro has be¬ come a wife—Oh, my father ! pity the conflict
conflict of this moment; pardon the wretch who, in misery and death, will pray for your health and prosperity. " H LLENA." Tbis, folding with an unsteady hand, I left upon the table ; it would in some measure elucidate mv flight, though, ala* ' it could bring no palliative to the wounded bosom of my parent. Again, impatient of delay, the like signal was hurled—I heard the murmur of com¬ plaint beneath my window—bow could 1 longer tarrv, when it was breathed in accents whieh ever thrilled upon my lieart? Hastening to secure some Httle relie of my unconscious father, I tied around my neek a miniature, which had been taken when the rich bloom of hap¬ piness dappled his cheek: it bad been the early offering of disinterested affec¬ tion, exulting in the virgin love of my deluded mother. Painful, harrowing, vvere the sensations it conveyed; it do-* ι 2 luged
luged my cheeks with tears, even in the moment of departure. Stifling my sobs, and struggling to assume a composure I could not feel, my eyes wandered in adieu around the chamber : for the last time they rested upon objects impressed by the first dawn¬ ings of reason—for the last time they measured the home of my infancy, with¬ out the start of madness. I descended to the garden—I stole like a thief by the chamber in whieh my father rested. Pale and wild as the night murderer, I sprang to the arms of my husband, nor, till I had lost sight of every local re¬ membrance, could I control the tumult within ; then I Hstened to the language of entreaty, to the soft, the stealing en¬ croachments of the heart, and gradually familiarized to my new habit, smiled at the glowing compliments of my hus¬ band.
CHAP-
CHAPTER XI. With the outward garb I assumed not the courage of a hero, for often did my start excite the smile of Eugenius ; of¬ ten, gazing tenderly in my face, did he rally the pale livery of sexual cowardice. I shuddered as we entered that long and dreary pass, the Torre di CiavoU : imagination conjured each distant sha¬ dow into banditti, and every sound teemed with the threat of danger, Na¬ ture's bulwark, the cleft rock, through whose bosom we were passing, frowned in awful majesty : jutting and dark, it reared its hardy summit, unadorned save by promiscuous patches of broom, fir, and stinted brushwood : the heavens seemed to hang upon its sterile peaks, and its cold and morbid damps to mock the glow of summer. ι 3 How
How ? vast, how impressive was the contrast, ivhen after toiling up the rough and flinty paths, ive first attained the heights* of the promontory of Cara¬ va ! Tbe sea breaking and foaming on the rocks below; the iidand crowned witii all that eye eould wish of plenty ; oUve^grounds and pastures, vines fring¬ ing the heights, and corn enriching the valleys ! The rosy tints of day blushed on the dew-spangled uplands, and the curling bosom of the Mediterranean, catdibig tiie bright effulgence, sweUed with a thousand hues. Sometimes our road wound through fruitful plantations ; sometitftes it descended to the sandy beach, and dappled by the blossoming oleander, tbe ricinus, and yellow poppy, swept almost to the water's edge. How- did my thoughts recur, to my father, when, with an exulting smile, Eugenius pointed out the spires of Santa Maria di Tindaro, sited on an eminence by the sea ! Solitary and drear, they seemed te brave
brave " the lapse of ages and the wredk of worlds."—* 4 AA r hat would be the pe¬ nalty of my transgression," he exclaim¬ ed, " did bigotry know the treasure of whieh I had despoiled her? Ah, Hele¬ na! what the tax for purloining the sweetest of Heaven's candidates ? 1 A.·*·*·!; the ян-ек unn, ulm, tied fruiu ν υ rl d К tare, İs <1оып\1 tu low¿ a \-> mirar*.** j»ra\V, То lu-taiit- t.tì-v and ingbís oí'bť.^on n-r, VV aii bus\ tünuıc rtnui^Jitıg in iıer brea-î — Ask il* íbe deem, iu her forlorn abode, That bad delusion is the wiii oťGo.l ľ 44 No, no," he pursued, placing his spread liand upon liis heart, íť Providence never ordained a sacrifice so dire^—never implanted the social virtues for fanati¬ cism to annihilate. Calamity may en¬ tail misanthropy, but youth, innocence, and beauty, forbid the cold, tbe freezing sacrifice. Glorying in the victim I have saved, my soul exults as my eye mea¬ sures her destined tomb. Why so ι 4 grave,
grave, my gentie love? Pure as the vestals beneath yon cloistered roof, du¬ ties tender and urgent will soon smile you into gladness, and blacken the gulph on which so late you tottered." My eye glanced upon my dress, my heart flew back to my father ; I could not speak, but Eugenius, with a sigh more eloquent than words, told me he marked the struggle within. Studying to rouse my thoughts from the sad con¬ templation which absorbed them, he bu¬ sied himself in expatiating on the wild varieties of nature, from the blossoming pomegranate at our side, to the far- stretching ridge of lofty mountains, o'er which the giant peaks of Etna were seen to rise. He dwelt on the volcanic matter burning in her bosom, and spoke of her mighty throes as the only anti¬ dote to man's terrestrial Eden: Sieilv was creation's richest garner, decked in the loves and graces of poetic imagery, yet did she bear in her teeming womb the
the seeds of her own destruction.— " Alas ! like the human mind!" I sighed, but the abstruse and fertile fancy of Eugenius had already caught the apt simile, and animadverting on the cor¬ rupt and mingled passions of the heart, they were alike marked, and alike blended wilh honeyed poison. How eagerly did I listen, how rapturously did my soul expand to the united elo¬ quence and wisdom of oratory and phi¬ losophy!—how often, with pride and exultation, did my eyes wander from eaeh distant object, to fix on the mov¬ ing, breathing, eetype of all-excelling Nature ! then, raising them to the blue expanse, inwardly did I bless the Cre¬ ator of earth and heaven, for the rieh award ofa partner so beloved. Buried as I had been in the deep re¬ tirement of my native vaUey, the near approach to a populous city awakened sensations not to be described. The τ 5 district
district tbrough wbkh we had journeyed was, as the Piano di Вгою, laden with the luscious stores of Ceres ; but though no sign of wonder marked my observ¬ ance of her vivid beauties, though un¬ moved I traced fruits and blossoms clustering on the same stem, raptu¬ rous was my exclamation of surprise in attaining the summit of tbe ancient Ernies. The mountain itself was bar¬ ren, clothed with nought but brush¬ wood, fern, and broom; but Messina lay at its base, her circular bay laden with vessels, her charming cape tipped with the bright effulgence of a setting sun. At the extremity of a grove of poplars and elms frowned the citadel ; tiie lighthouse towering in the centre of the haven ; the Lazaretto, marking the place of quarantine for the mariners ofthe Levant : behind her, in the shape .ofa crescent, rose her native screen, tlie »ancient Felorium ; opposite fer spread the
the smiling coast of Calabria. My arm was outstretched in wonder, my eyes upraised in admiration. Eugenius smiled at my ardour: with transport be marked the glowing vermeil of my cheek, and bailed as the surety of bliss the indications of that enthusi¬ asm which had made me bis own. Fa¬ miliarized to eacb separate beauty, he explained all that my eye encompassed ; be {minted out the supposed Charybdis of Homer, and beguiled our descent to the eity by expatiating on man's solu¬ tion of the phenomenon. Thougb from my masculine attire no possible discovery eould arise, still Eu¬ genius anxiously pressed an immediate removal from Sicily : my father might pursue, might overtake us; and in a land of fanatic bigotry, heinous was the erime of seducing from her duty the destined spouse of heaven. Trembling for the safety of my husband, I readily acceded to all he proposed. Impatient ι 6 of
of delay» his friends had quitted Messi¬ na, and on the morning succeeding our arrival, embarking in an aimed felucca, we weighed anchor, and the verdant isle of my nativity soon looked like a speck in the horizon. In vain would I tax the powers of language to explain the varied sensations which swelled my heart as that little speck receded ; I bent forward—I strained my eyes to catch the last look, the last shadow : it was lost—the heavens and the sea mingled —Sicily glowed but on memory. Tears streamed down my cheeks, sighs swelled røy bosora—I turned—I beheld Euge¬ nius at my side : his heart, like my own, was full—he was gazing intently on me.—" Helena," he murmured, 44 best, dearest of heaven's gifts !" I threw myself into his extended arms^—I wept like an infant on bis bo¬ som.— s< Home, father, country, all to mel" I sobbed, and for a little moment, clasped in the fold of fond endearment, I seemed
I seemed to forget there was any other tie in the creation. But enough be Hie melancholy detail of my own woes^— alas ! why swell my sad story with the pungent pangs of a too-refined sensi¬ bility ? Hastening then over the delays and dangers of our voyage, over the threats and perils whkh barred eaeh en¬ trance into France, behold us by a cir¬ cuitous route hovering upon her fron¬ tier, listening to the rumour of her enormities, yet pining to seek a haven within her bosom. A novice in the wretched politics whieh, aiming at the very root of vir¬ tue, outraged the ordinations of religion and of nature, I felt secure because my own Httle world of happiness was with me : nor, till tbe gloom of care lowered on the brow of my husband, did I pic¬ ture the reality of that wretchedness I was doomed to feel. Though love was the master-passion, patriotism
patriotism still glowed in the heart of Eugenius. Heavy was tbe conflict of bis feeHngs, bitter the aggravations which hourly met bis ear: conscience reproached a Hfe of inaction, honour re¬ probated the tie which dimmed the glow of heroism. In vain he strove to stifle the new illusion whieh mocked bis senses—glory pointed to the allied army, and duty, in the cause of the persecuted Louis, rose superior to passion.— 44 How selfish is that heart," exclaimed Euge¬ nius, " absorbed in its own happiness î In times like these, perish the dastard spirit w r hkh ivould live in inaction !" A cold, a chilling tremor reached my heart; I felt as though darkness had shadowed the earth, as though the sun of cheerfulness had vanished ; my eyes were fixed upon bim, but utterance was denied me. 44 The dictates of honour are impera¬ tive," he continued. " Dare I live in peace,
peace, when my king, my country, my family, are bleeding with a tliousand wrongs ? Dare I------" He paused, for my sob was suffocat¬ ing : tbe glow of heroism vanished ; be saw me pale, almost fainting, my hands clasped, my features convulsed. He snatched me to his bosom—he mingled his tears with mine.— (i L T nfeeling bar¬ barians Γ he articulated. 4 * Helena, friend of my bosom, what have I utter¬ ed ?—what Jiave 1 dared to breathe ?" *· Let us fly from the world !" I ex¬ claimed, when I could find breath for words ; * 4 let us shun the habitations of men : in some wood, in some ivilder- ness, beyond the reach, beyond the hearing of their enormities, with love in our bearts, let us live and die ! Oh, my Eugenius ! if you value my life, if you value my senses, talk no more of the calls of honour," Eugenius answered not, but the rose upon his cheek faded. From this pe¬ riod
riod a thousand new terrors assailed me: in losing sight of my husband, hope felt to die within me : the name of France was a dagger's point at my heart—I trembled at the dawn of each succeed¬ ing day, and even in sleep I felt not se¬ cure unless his band was closely clasped in mine. Blessed Mary ! what fearful anticipations, what sad—sad prognostics of o'erwhelming destiny ! In vain Eu¬ genius tried to smile away my appre¬ hensions ; beneath that assumed smile, I read a mind ill at ease, a faney tortured by wild, by shapeless chimeras : his duty and his feelings were at variance : a martial air wrould sublime his fine features into enthusiasm—a sigh, a look, a word, from me, ivould change the colour of that enthusiasm, and melt him into love. Four months had elapsed, since flying from Sicily, we had found sanctuary in the canton of Zurich. The habit of my sex was resumed, and though my mind often reverted'to my fether, though I pondered
pondered on his sufferings and on his wrongs, still reflecting on the life of im¬ prisonment I had escaped, on the living death of profession, my thoughts were unmingled with bitterness. Heaven knows, no wish wandered beyond my dwelling : supremely blessed in that af¬ fection whkh was the life and spring of my existence, I sought no withheld con¬ fidence—I spoke not of the expectations, the family, the early life of Eugenius : I will not say that I felt not, mourned not his silence upon aU which concerned bimself, but attributing it to his dread of inflicting pain, and fully persuaded of the unabated fervour of his attachments I hid every shadow of regret in my own bosom. Studious but for his happiness, claiming in his smile the rich, the dear reward of every care, ever did my heart expand at his approach, never did it pie¬ ture bliss beyond his presence. I look¬ ed upon him as a superior being ; I en¬ riched him with all the virtues which an
an enthusiastic mind can call exquisite; and then, warm in genuine gratitude, I studied to elevate every feeling, every sentiment of my own nature, to make me worthy the distinguished blessing of his cherished love. In this dream of felicity, days and weeks wore away. Diligently did I ehase every anticipation of evil, nor be¬ eause the brand of exterminating dis¬ cord seared the vital honour of France, did I picture that the smiling Eden we inhabited might like her plains be de¬ luged : alas ! I knew not tbe blind zeal of party, I guessed not the passions which tear and govern tbe minds of men. Our Httle dwelling, half-way cHmbed up tlie verdant slope of that valley which embosoms the town of Eglissure : from the windows we could trace the rapid course of the meandering Rhine, its green waves rolling among leafy hills, fertilizing and embellishing; we could see a romantic mixture of fruitful
fruitful pastures, barren rocks, and hu¬ man dwellings: here, buildings totter¬ ing to their base ; there, curling smoke denoting the home of labour : gardens, groves, woods, completing a coup d'æil, solemn, magnificent, and enchanting. Sometimes Eugenius wonld descant upon the sublimities of nature, as though, Hke myself, be eould be content to resign ail intercourse witb man—as though, forgetful of the world, to love and to be beloved, ivas the ultimate end of his being ; then again be would start almost into frenzy at tbe ensanguined strides of depopulating revolutionists, curse tbe country which had given him birth, and swear that a neutral proce¬ dure ivas an eternal blot to honour, Shuddering yet glorying at the ebul¬ litions of a spirit in one my blessing and my punishment, I read in ever}^ passing gust the denouncement of mise¬ ry. My heart drooped in my bosom ; my spirits sunk, and even in the hour of
of security, when happiness appeared my own, the intuitions of fancy, conju¬ ring a phalanx of hydra ills, poisoned the pure spring of enjoyment. Euge¬ nius was torn from me, and my life was desolate ; the mournful accents of adieu would dissolve the shackles of sleep; and then, panting, sobbing, I would gratefully thank Heaven that as yet wretchedness was a dream, The dappled tints of autumn, mel¬ lowing the rich verdure of summer, had crowned the toils of labour with a teem¬ ing harvest ; the fields were despoiled of their golden store, and natures calm tranquillity too fatally contrasted the perturbed disquietude of man. Every day fresh horrors swelled the catalogue of human crimes : the whole duehy of Savoy had yielded to the arms of France : panic had paralysed the hearts of the Piedmontese ; they had abandoned their posts—they had fled in disorder. Mont¬ melian and Chamberry had opened their gates
gates to the victors, and like an impe¬ tuous flood, Montesquieu and his myr¬ midons bore all before them: neither age or sex found pity ; rapine and blood marked their footsteps; the palace of the noble, the cottage of the labourer, were alike ransacked and destroyed by these boasting disseminators of liberty. Merciful powers ! never shall I forget the look, the agony of my husband, when he heard of the capture of Mont¬ melian ! The cold dews of death seem¬ ed to hang upon his forehead ; his hands were clenched, his eyes fixed, and the groans of his labouring heart were as the parting struggles of nature. I knelt at his feet—I clasped his trembling hands in mine—I besought bim to be com¬ posed—and when his head sunk upon my bosom, when sobs and scalding tears succeeded, I blessed those tears, for, like rain refreshing the parched earth, they softened and preserved his senses. Whole
Whole honra elapsed,, and Montme¬ lian w the only sound whkh passed his lips. In vain I threw my arms around him—-in vain I breathed the unchecked effusions ef tenderness; he heard me, but he varied not his posture. Once he raised his band to push me from him, murmuring, in accents almost convulsed— 44 Fatal passkn ! it has vio¬ lated every duty of my life !" 44 What passion ? what duty ?" I fear¬ fully urged. 4i Answer me, Eugenius, am I not your wife ? Where exists a claim half so binding?" 44 Wife !" he repeatedi and a cold shud¬ der crept over him, and then he plaeed hi» hand before bis eyes, as thougb anx¬ ious to shut out the light of Heaven. 44 Your own Helena," I resumed, 4ť the ehosen tender partner of your Hfe. Look up, my friend, my love, my husband ; tell me the hidden grief, ЬшЬэдг nota sorrow wbkb I must not «hate" Щ did look
lodk up— riie did fix his eyes upoa me-, but Ihey^ beame4 an expression X çan never forget, " Urge m^not» H&lena," he mourn¬ fully said, ** lest you, even yo«, should curse me.—I scarce know what I say," he continued, tracing in my alternately flushed and pale cheek the violence of my emotion. " Helena, angel of my life, forgive me ! My mother resided near Montmelian—let tbat plead for the language of despair." Tbe night passed in lamentation and tears ; one moment Eugenius would away to MontmeUan—he would bare his bosom to shield his mother ; tbe next he would clasp me to his heart, call me his ail of happiness, and vow that fate itself should not wrest me from him. Little nerved for a new trial, we arose, Eugenius was calm, but melan* cho^y. Rfvorøidng hk grief, I attempted not
not to dissipate bis abstraction, and iHien witb the inconsistency so*corømon in human nature, piniiig to collect-even the exaggerations of report,· he proposed visiting Eglissure, I had neither will or power to withhold him. The sod still glittered with the early tears of morn¬ ing as we silently pursued the sloping pathway : the green waters of the Rhine rolled majestically through her borders; the heavens were unclouded, and every feature of the far-spreading landscape was robed in the smiling 7 ğarb of peace, Alas ! wiiat had we to do with peace ? Sombre and dark, convulsed with hur- ricaneV and wildly distorted, nature might have dispfeyed some similitude to our internal -feeliwgSi A'crowd had eolkcted at the pòsthou^e îthe inurmur "of inqu iry prevailed : anxiety ' spoke г in ledøh countenance, and every moment seemed to teem with fete. Trembling, dbiflungto the arm of Hay husbands he pressed
pressed forward—he had nearly reached the courier, when a stranger anested his progress—" De Beaufort, is it you ?" De Beatifort ! Ah God ! that name ' —it froze—it felt to annihilate my be¬ ing ! The curse of my father rung in my ear ; my heart's blood congealed, and without a sigh, without a groan, I sank senseless at their feet.
CHAPTER XII I know not how long I continued in this state of living death, but when I revived, with a sensation of indescribable vacuity I gazed around ; my brain felt burning, #nd neither the past or present could I mould into any thing like order: mingled horrors pressed upon me, and the annihi¬ lating threat of a parents malediction fell as a blast, a mildew, on my hopes. vol. ι. к Attributing
, Attributing all to the Midden pressun pf extrenie indisposition, Eugenius tried to sooth and to assure me ; he supported my heavy bead upon bis bosom ; be clasped my trembling hands in his, and and by every endearing expression of sympathy and fondness, besought com¬ posure. Alas f that yoie^ that accent sharpened tîie pangs of despair : with a conv ulsiv e tremor 1 shrunk from bim— I buried my eyes from the light of dav —I groaned in the bitterest anguish, Trembling for щу Jifo-be £ threw himself oa bis knees beside me 4 beheld me with force in his aims; he called upon me with tJafiijfflVftt^itt^tc vdieiqence. 1 heard lp£Vïty$ ¥№^Р! Г Ь^ Я s *^ war ~ blqçd ^ ( .^ п ^7^^ц лт1 ^ г р8, my whole s i^Jp.^)ìl ϊγΊψϊμ itself; - ? ** It "is щЬ i^işs/^ţaidthe streger; j¿qa\pber f/ De Beaufort, Д vviff-^ —" r Uç ^ψφ,βΐ my s^ek, vyas terrify¬ ing- , ι ,, * repealed—
1 repeated— 4t De Beaufort!' tben struggling for freedom, fell into violent convulsions. Tottering betwixt Hfe and death, I was conveyed to our dwelling, and a long lapse of delirium and misery sueceeded. Not for an instant did Eu¬ genius quit my pillow : anxious to bail the sHghtest dawn of sanity, he listened to my wild ravings, and shared the bit¬ ter conflicts of despair. Perpetually did I pronounce his name, and yet I knew him not; sometimes starting up, I would seek him around the chamber, and even when my eyes rested on bim, exclaim— % He will not come !" Holv Heaven ' why did disease yield to tenderness ?— why did be snatch me from death to in¬ flict pangs more severe ? I revived, and the secrets, of my heart were Md open— the name of De Chateauroux, the delin¬ quency of щу mother, Eugenius list ^^d-^bi^ sJmddered at the^ţale— bis dıeşfc. wß$ *as t p^le as my own, and his ^magitaţi . .·-, * ¿ju? к. 2 *· " Cruel
44 Cruel and unjust !" he ejaculated, when I pronounced the curse which had been so fatally invoked ; and when, in outraged feeling, I sought a justificatkn for my father, he shook his head and said^—" The vvorld contains many De Beauforts ; why should his curse devolve onaU? Can justice class the innocent with the guilty?—can mercy transmit to the child the transgressions of the pa¬ rent?" " The child!" I repeated; " Power Supreme ! is it as I dreaded ? am I indeed w r edded to the son of my mother's se¬ ducer?" 44 1 did not say so," pursued Eugenius ; " I spoke in a general sense. No, no, my love, the son of the De Beaufort your fether execrates is not your husband." I was satisfied ; a load of eare was re¬ moved from my heart. A ready con¬ vert to the arguments of Eugenius, with him I accused my father of prejudice, and even the curse whkh had so long and
and so bitterly pressed upon memory, combated by his sophistry, flitted like clouds before the rays of morning. I did not even question the disguise which he had so successfully practised ; content with his explanation, I traced all to the wretched politics wbich had disorganized his country ; and though I now knew him a De Beaufort, the enthusiasm of love prevailed. But though the wrath of conscience was for a time softened, though the sting of recoUection ceased to corrode, care and anxiety still held a busy empire in my breast. Since the introduction of the cheva¬ lier Angerville, the patriotic ardour of Eugenius redoubled; no threat of danger eould quell his zeal—no denouncement cheek his enthusiastic wish to join the standard of loyalty. He panted for pre¬ eminence—he struggled against those restraints which justice and humanity imposed. To quit me was agony—to stay with me was an impeachment aHke кЗ of
of honour and of courage. In a thou¬ sand instances I read thecõnflíct passing within : Angerville ' was his confidant, and soon did the insidious incitements of pretended fiiendship dupe him into an active emissary4ii a treacherous drama. Alas ! how eould I* dive L beneath the smooth, tbe subtle Surface ?—how could I outrage my own purity of thought by suspecting tbe actions of another ? Li5e the primeval tempter to evil, Angerville eame ; he marked the waverings of the heart—he tore aside the flimsy veil öf security—he plunged a dagger ddèp, deep—he-— ¿Whitherttmï wandering ? Not he— not'*AhgëniUè-^-no, no' An¬ gerville was an agéÄŕ'mľthe hands of Heaven, and I was doomed, in sorrow,' in fasting, in prayer, in remorse, to pay the priée of sin, I must lay aside my pen—itis steeped in blood—frenzied images'fnt before me, and the quick consuming fire of con-' sdence burns tind sears my brain. Hark, that
that groan f Can it bè my father ° Fool f fool ' the dead cannot groan : Eugenius and my father are both at rest. It is I—it is the wretched penitent of Santa Maria dì Tindaro, who ean neither slum-' ber or sleep—who craves for rest in vain' —who knows no hope, no suspension from misery, but in tlie grav'e. 1 *" OW that the last sleep were »come! that I might close my eyes and, shut out day¬ light ' that I migbt *' \ ew uo mole tl.e un kui *лауч of meii, Or be a wee-j »ni» wiÇnes* olvtøm^&oaii" v Ό ( ""■'t Oh that tlie stone - pressed upon шу breast—tbat it hid alike my frailties and my griefs ' A r ain hope ! frailty lives be¬ yond the grave—it lives in the busy minds of men—it is a blot whieh time nor suffering can wash awav—it blisters memory —it usurps, it tyrannizes, it de¬ stroys. In fabled story, there is a Lethe, a Styx, a black oblivious draught whkh may expunge the past; but in bfo, in к 4 real,
real, unvarnished, every-day existence, memory wffl rankle, conscience will up¬ braid. Stranger! thou whom chance con- ducteth to this holy pile—thou who readest this tale of woe, think not to transgress and to forget—think not that prayer wffl ensure peace. " Upon my beads devoutly penitent, Nine hundred Paternosters every day, And thrice nine hundred Aves Imay say; And thrice tbree times may fast from any bit," yet at the altar's foot, at the midnight vigil, as in the lonely'ceU, Conscience, " Tremendous power ! Makes the past present, and tbe future frown "
CHAP-
CHAPTER XIII. From the introduction of the chevaHer Angerville beneath our roof, the dark and gloomy atmosphere of my destiny began to thicken. Versed in the human heart, he knew how to play upon the minds of men ; and even whilst he re¬ tained the master-key of his own actions, he dived amidst the secret folds of othets. Carefully did he conceal the selfish prin¬ ciple which led him to fan the glowing embers of a valiant spirit— Eugenius was to be the victim of a mistaken, a misplaced friendship, and I------ Alas ! whither am I wandering ? I must bridle these ungovernable feelings—I must check the wild flights of my pen—I must mould into something iike order, my sorrows and my wrongs. к 5 The
by other enormities. Oneglia was the next scene of sacrilege, barbarity, and slaughter : burning ^ one pile/her eon- vents were outraged, andher priests mur¬ dered- But though success thus conti- л mied to follow the movements of tbe republican arms—though in every direc¬ tion pank seized tlié^tjèsieged, and mili¬ tary stores, camion, and ammunition, fell intothe hancfs'òf the besiegers—though tlie hapless emigrants, bereft of that " balm of hurt minds," hope, were left un¬ pitied ¿net .unaídeá— though tbey were outlawed bv tlieir country, and if found within her barriers, denounced and exe- cuťeďas traitors,'.still Eugenius, mouni- inğ*o*çf ríié şshes of Montmelian, pined for t tfie Instant 1 to attest nis prineipfos, ana wiel^ the siyoèd oţ"vengeance. *' _* r The lasFtints 1 of autumn ivére iast f , l*—j:v 'н У,*.' **Лу.-У l·^ f - 'J .-^*ι- fading, an^i, the iron reışn of winter threatened to increase the f despair and horrors of anarchy : consternation spoke
'f "l f'
iii ' every eountenäneeV^for the wild and turbulent fections 'dŕ Ýhfen,' menacing Ш~ alike witb róiií^áimeá-át the iaereň IWes of royalty, таё cöïiiitïtüent asfeemblieá at Paris were cotnfiosed bf tnemb^ 1 whose total annihilation of feeling r ren-' dered tbem fit agents for the riiost ffagi- tiöus crimes : eadi struggle of pariy was marked witb blobcl and death : bold ail ď hardened áidventurers seized tbe heïffîo? power, whose only aim at competition was to outvie each other in eftomiitý, * and alternately did the'Jacobins ancrĞi-' rdndists blaze liké ' firebrands upon tne earţh. But whv dwell on än era whidi called forth the execrations'of all civilizeâ Ëü- 4 rope ?—why record me fatal progress of crimes which, liké the retributive thun¬ der of Heaven, shook the foundation óf thè J political world ? ' Alas ! from my own little ivorld, the halcyon smile of peace fiad alike fléd, and catching the ex¬ it 6 ternal
ternal colour of wild commotion, all be¬ came care, mystery, and incertitude. , Long and frequent were the absences of Eugenius : often through the dreary hours of night did I retain my lonely watch, Hstening for eaeh coming sound, and trembling but for his safety ; often steeping my pillow in my tears, did I petition Heaven to avert the evils I dreaded, or flying to the window, pursue with my eyes the darkened pathway leading to Eglissure. Sometimes pale, thoughtful, he would return to my arms ; sometimes, with cheeks flushed, and eyes emitting fire, he would push me from him, and smother in his own breast the deep workings of his overcharged mind. : У Неюиа," he exdaimed, as under the shelter of night he returned pale and agitated toour dwelling, " we must away to Sehafhausen. The friends of Anger- vilkpwitt be your fiiends; they will sooth, protect comfort you ; they—" ' 4 1 need
44 1 need no soother, no protector, no comforter," interrupting him: " blessed with the friend, the husband ofmy heart, fate herself owns no power to ivound. Be ever the same Eugenius who wooed me from my native isle, and not in an unpeopled desert will my heart find room for murmurs.'' 44 We must away to Sehafhausen," said Eugenius, drawing me closer to his bosom. " Helena, my own Helena, in love know me ever the same Eugenius ; but fate, honour, circumstances, all forbid; inaction." I gazed fearfully, doubtfully, on him.—* 4 Angervffle's mother resides at Sehafhausen," he pursued : 44 she will protect you, Helena, whilst I seek out the ashes of my mother beneath the ruins of Montmelian." Deep, almost sepulchral, was the tone of his voice. I saw that his heart Wasi fixed on the fetal ¿bring, and what could I urge to avert it? He had leagued himself with an adventurous band; he had
„ftft¿ .:. ZOO THE NUN OF had siv f cjrn with his own to swell the 4 sea oflsioqd already 'sîieïï.tathertb^n aban¬ don thë èaüse of outraged loyalty, Alas f ' .b .,ν, . : ту ν с!, ¿al з V- v1 ^** v : f nought remained ror ще but submission* and ivjth a sad and a foreboding spirit, I "saw tpe tempest gathering tò .enguTpn ill ·ί>*1 i" ΐ -l-t - ! » ' * '>Ч ' ^ - my hopes and рейсе. n In thrçe sjıçrt days we quittecl JSgfis- suťé— w r e exchanged the shelter vve had cHosen, for Jthe' dwelling and the society ΓΙ f .1,1 'i'-, n| % С 1 < _á " тааатце Angerville. Hapless, in- jurétí, 4 ótlťráged frienàf in tli v bosom I could bave poured forth my sorrows—to thjr^ar I coqla nave conhded^my wrongs ; buí aéáilí marbled tlíáť Vtisom, and that u a vf vv '' iui: %niCi f >d , AViMiiiL·^: ' warm heart glowing wifh. social feeling, ^ Пш :ΑψΥύ I TiU ir-4 Ъп9*оН . ; 'í f ŕ ,* «° - throbs no more aţ fîıe ршщ òf woe..* Murdered saint ! angel motner of a fiend- like son ! if, from that Heaven tbou now ernoyesť, tbe jfcord of sın and sorrow '- *'\АЪ№а W* t?i- ! L : % -2i Li. *4»fOV v.i - may be traced, blot wim thy tears each n slbuj 3fijfx // ты viu^oJiilsl uî.İ ло î»«^ feu transffression^Jand pľead fc 15'- losf
SANTA MARIA DI TÎNDARO, ΖΟΊ 'r :· )Où i .ho yríňli v »(iov j ικγο-> ί r '■ i^uiiib jil d:· i· 1 ч^ц; >?-·.. ^iliiij" í' » v ť -; a»ij 4 ■> 1 J y e ; v, ι r .r. j ;>,'j /rJ'.' s¿ 1 .» ■*■" '.cöip^'k^v:.''-" 1 <' : · 1 -t ! to I J..V .· * » V ι 3 \ > i ! . } > »γ * i f' < ι**\ί^ΐ" ν í Ori Drooping at heart, yèt struggling то" assume the smile qf acquiesçeftce, 1 loàt sigbt of tbe dear ana peaceful cTwdlmg whkh for weeks ahd 'months had shel¬ tered my Head from tbe storms oi fate," J Eugenius silently journeyed by my' side:' 4 ' Angerville, tbe sworn foe to melancholy, rallied our depression, and beguiled ťhe pressure of thought by the'fimely intro¬ duction ef humour and anecdote! PoV-
,j* j 4
cofhprehensive mémoiý J teemed with ; historic record; he u dipped jnto ţlie láp I of time,'" and expatiated* oh 'the deeds of л n -y »·%■« \ /'^í ') ι*Γ η >**· 'hìì vlad former ages, lhe foreboding pang of calamity'lost its edge, arid soórľ åta Ше J diversified beauties of creation iure my f
^1
thoughts from every earthly ill. I traced thè green Rhine swelling beneath the dazzHng sunbeams, now curving amidst leafy hills, now delving flinty fissures, and losing itself amidst rocks and foHage. At noon we passed through Sehafhausen, and, scarce a mile beyond, embellished with every pkturesque variety, we hailed the Parian vffla of madame Angerville. De Beaufort pointed it out as the calm haven of fiiendship—Angerville, smiling, expatiated solely upon the sub- Hme and the beautiful by whkh it Was encompassed: he directed my attention to the hilly barrier which separates Ger¬ many from Switzerland; from thence to the emerald Rhine, rolling to its gigan¬ tic fell : a thousand rainbow tints marked the rising vapours, and loud and deep was the roar of its maddening eddies. I trembled—I turned from it: alas! it bore too strong a similitude to the ex¬ terminating discord which seared the very vitals of France. My frighted spi¬ rit
rit pined for the calm and the peaceful —I gazed on the skirting mountains of Hohenstoffel and Tyrol : their dark and sombre grey accorded better with my fedings, for in their deepest solitude, joyfully would I have shrunk, to bave escaped the threatened fiat of separation. A tear hung upon my cheek—I turned to Dø Beaufort: his eyes were fixed upon me—he spoke not, and I could not speak, A near approach to the house called for exertion—I felt the impressive claims of friendship, yet when Anger¬ ville aided me to alight, that tear, long pendent, fell upon his hand. My face and bosom crimsoned, for I saw him raise his hand to his lips. It was the, ; transgression of a moment: he read doubt and apprehension in my looks, and too deep was he schooled in dissi? . mulation to tempt them further; he laughed at the vivid tint whkH.n^kşţl the casual gallantry, and addressing Eu¬ genius,
genius, gaily bade bim initiate me in tlíí? usages ofthe world. Amidst tbe motley group who people the drama of Hfe, there are characters Who, in the first moment of introduction, feel almost to steal into the heart, and rifle all its confidence. The mother of Angerville ivas the character I ivould describe. Thougb pale, and drooping beneath the pressure of disease, I bailed a friend in the benignant glance of her eye—& soother, a counsellor, in the mild tones of her seraphic voiee. AA r eaned from tbe perishable dreams ofthe world, no longer blinded by the misty vapours'of illusion 1 , sbe yet regard¬ ed ine with that''eye of philanthropy, vVhieh penetrating into the inmost soul, weêpá 4 for those feelings Wbkh reason* arid philosophy have alike denounced: ¿hè marked thV časť of carb k upon my browV she" r&d in my suppressed sigh * a* mind lätioüftiig ivitn" inquietude ; in -·'"-- the
ılıe wistful, doubtful glance which ever followed the movements of De Beaufort, she deciphered a fancy tortured vvith some seeret dread. Sometimes she would ralty tiiat inquietude, but oftener ivould she strive to awaken fortitude, by dwell¬ ing on tbe vicissitudes and chances of life. She ivould paint tbe disappoint¬ ments of her own youth, tbe gradual trials which had relaxed her hold on life; but not in the swollen catalogue did she recapitulate one source for re¬ morse, not one omission of duty, not one íiolatiòií of rectitude, to blacken the page of memory—Ob no ! her sor¬ rows vvere tbe inflictions of others—her sufferings the ordinations of Providence, No deserted parent rose in judgment against her ; no festering curse rankled like a gangrene on her hopes : like the stm dfecliifing in glory, the evening of her existence ivas unclouded—her thoughts, 'hér vvishes, resting on thať heaven
heaven she pined to share with all man¬ kind, Three weeks elapsed, and in the so- dety and converse of madame Anger¬ ville I became more submissive to im¬ perious necessity. The day, the hour of separation arrived ; and though on the eve of becoming a mother, I saw De Beaufort depart with more firmness than I had* dared to picture. Relying on the proffered friendship of AngerviHe r I im- plored him to watch over the hope of πψ^ existence, to check tiie ebullitions of rashness, to guard him in the hour of psiiki Eugenius forced a smile; he pressed,me doser to his bosom, and though he endeavoured to check it,- I felt bis warm tears distil upon my cheek. Jf I leave you in safety," he said ; ** the mother Qf my friend will protect and sooth you« Fear not-for me, Helena; ypi^^wiU Jive in my mimb m my heart : уадг image will be my shield, my safe¬ guard-—
guard—it wffl intervene between me and danger, for in beckoning to the bliss ofre- union, it will make me careful ofmy life." I sobbed—I could not speak^—my arms were clasped around him, my eyes in silent appeal were raised to Heaven. The attempted raillery of Angerville recalled me to myself: he tried to ridi¬ cule the weakness of the heart; but when he grasped my hand in adieu, when he kissed tiie wan cheek of his uncom¬ plaining mother, his quivering Up be¬ trayed the effort vain—Nature conquer¬ ed the cold rules of system, and a tear spoke the omnipotence of her ordinations. Long after my eyes had ceased to discern all that was dear and precious in existence, I fingeret} at the window, my hands clasped, and my face drooping on nay bosom: alas! I felt as if the stay of my life was gone—-as ifin one little nfo- ment tihe whole universe had become a blank, smd hope and joy had alike ex¬ pired. The
r The soft accents of madame Anger- ville roused me from absorption : witfi a gentleness all her own, she drew me frpm the window, and gradually, ή -orn the blank of despair, awakened me f to , other thoughts and otjier feelings. Sweet antiqjipatiojos revived: Hope's bright illusions dazzle4i and ^oon did 1 leşni ţo smifo upon the pious arguments s qf i,ny eonjiforter. She told ще that other duttes demanded exertion; she con vinced ще, tbat f however painful tbe tax of bç- i^g disunited from.tbpse we loyf, it was no*blind zeal, whichf banished De Beau- fp^ţ^fn^yaţms,; that tlj£ bleeding ţ wr9|igs of a legitimate sovereign de- maj^d^dţli^ fealty and copiage of çvery Joy al sQ|ť;,thaf, Ю%«№>Ж4 *#Х*Й¥^ feeji^g^ugtitcheş^y to be щст$ф$ i 1 ? #^?;0öod İ ац^ tjiaţ щ Ьещ ¡pçpfr Şhe Щ$*Щ thaţ^ngp^i% lt waf i: % last, the only son of her Miopes, th^ щ\$ .,« remaining
remaining link whicb bound ber to,tbe world; yet witb an enthusiasm, with a fer¬ vour which momentarily flushed herpak cheek— - €ť Sponer*" she exdaimed, 4i would I aiourn him dead 911 the field of ho¬ nour, than judge him accessary to the accursed crime of treason and rebdlfon l»y a conduct of pusillanimous inaction : sooner ¡would I know him doomed to a death of sufferance and of torture,, than see bim neuter in a war Hke this. , Oh tbat every loyal Frenchman would rally round the king ! .that, undaunted by the threat of revolutionary despots, tlicy vvould copcihiqe in one great cause,. a$d exterminate ,from the face of Goq's^aţ&ll tin hirduig enginş&of a demoniac cuew&' But though at times I too*would gfovy with tbe fire of patriotism, oftener did* щу heart føoop in wwıa$ş wjeajf i^ess-f -т oftener ,d¿4 it shrink at thp ^i^ora of war,, ^d tnuse^/f-r; its f b?rds|ups- and, ifø ggrils with siekeni|?gr^preh^nsio^ r I|i sleep, the sword poised over tbe bead of my
my husband—shapeless and disjointed images crowded upon imagination, and often did I start and listen, as though the fearful death-groan could in reality reach my ear : seas of blood swam before my eyes, fancy ached with wild and dire forebodings. Sometimes, shrinking even from the converse of madame Angerville, I would wander alone from her dwelling, revising the past scenes of my life—recalling Si¬ dly, recalling my father; and then weep¬ ing, shuddering, deplore the voluntary desertion of my love. Alas ■ to feelings such as mine, how could I recondle the blank of absence?—how could I do otherwise than lament the seeming pre¬ eminence of patriotism? In my breast no duty was half so strong as affection— in rny heart no flame glowed half so fer¬ vent as the flame of love : with Euge¬ nius, a desert would have been heaven— without him, creation ivas a blank, and Hfe a burthen. Eagerly,
Eagerly, anxiously did I watch fo» the promised dispatch; the days, tha bours w r ere numbered; and when the sun rose and set in silence, my fears and conjectures nearly amounted to frenzy. In vain my friend urged the difficulties of epistolary intercourse-—in vain she ex¬ patiated upon tbe turmoils and dangers ofthe times; deaf to reason, lost ulmost to sanity, I beard her without convic¬ tion, and fanned the gloomy inroads of depression, till tbey bad nearly sapped existence. How did my hand tremble, bow did my temples throb, when I broke the beai of the long-promised ktie|*! ît was written vvith policy—itwas convey¬ ed witb caution, but it was Uuivy$- known, dear-piized writing of De JìeOAlj lort; as such, it was a panacea &кщд feeHngs, precious as tbe vital blood chicli flowed around μι y heart, ;11$ vv^^safo —be was iu heaiţh-r-be still, lovçd, he still fondly cherished tiie knags* Qf Ads i Idena. Father of Heaven 1«Црус did I * í í s \f ** *> vul. j. L bind
bend my knee in gratitude to tbeel— hdw *did I offer np at thy altar the prayers ahd thanksgivings of a spirit, cheered and Toused almost from the grave! The trusty messenger tarried hot a single day : true to his charge, he buried the answer in bis bosom, and fled tvithout resolving one single inquiry. A whole month elapsed, and my fears ágyain revived : a long, a rayless winter spread itself before me : hope again sick¬ ened, and had I possessed a single clue to guide my wanderings, such was tbe state of my feelings, I firmly believe I should have embarked in the Quixotic enter¬ prize of following my husband even into the battle's thickest heat How often, in the dead of night, when reflection and re- ifiorge strewed sharp thorns upon my ppow, did I muse upon the violated hopes of my neglected fiitber—^did.I re¬ call the once-hated solitude of Santa Ma¬ ria ώ „Tkidaro, and pine, in spirit and in soul, to have been doomed the unknown, unsought,
unsought, unprized sister of her order ! Alas ! feelingly did I lament the wilful impetuosity of youth—ruefully did I de¬ plore those glowing colourings of fancy, w T hich once pictured as uninteresting, dull, and cold, the lessons of experience and reason. In this state of mental fever, my sweet cherub, my Httle angel Eugenia, opened her eyes to tbe Hght of day ! God of nature ! how did her faint cry endear ex¬ istence ! bow did it pierce into the in¬ most recesses of my soul, and teach me the value of my being! She smiled, and tbe past throes of agony were for¬ gotten—she looked the breathing epi¬ tome of her father, and every pang was repaid. My child ! my bkssing ! my Eugenia !—oh that I had knelt upon tby - grave! that I bad deposited tby angel form io the cold earth ! My treasure !—- * my pride!—my darling! where, where art thou now? My brain bü№&— Ely * eyes grow dim—darkness, ktøspair' en*- L 2 vdops
Velòps me* That theire—that theme is torture: I mmt pause^-I must prdy, lest the blank of madness returns*
CHAPTER XV. **~********¿?**r** The oppression whieh overpowered my senses has passed away—I am calm, collected, even in writing the name of Eugenia. There are hours when the mind cannot bear retrospection—when despair, numbing the springs of hope, expunges every existing good—vvhen the black catalogue of misery alone spreads itself before us—when the short lapses from woe, in this our mortal pil¬ grimage, seem as a dream in the night. Oh ! there are hours when remembrance is tbe bitterest curse entailed on the creature man—when thought sickens— wben annihilation would be mercy : but those
those hours are gone ; tears have soften* ed my feelings, and piety and reason have resumed tbeir sway. I have knelt at the altar of my worship : in con¬ trition, in penance, 1 have confessed my frailties, and supplicated grace. Hope, Hke the phoenix, springs from its own ashes—once more I raise my thoughts to Heaven, and picture, in the plenitude of Heaven's mercy, a reunion in a bet¬ ter and a happier world. Five weeks did a new and a delightful duty beguile the listlessness of time. The wild conflicts whkh rocked and ravaged the political ivorld extended not to the calm haven of friendship. Madame Angerville, considerate and be¬ nevolent, soothed each rising inquie¬ tude, tended me with almost maternal solicitude, and preached on hope, even wben her oivn bosom sickened in dis¬ may. Carefully did she veil the swollen catalogue of enormities, whieh, with eternal disgrace, registered tiie annals l3 of
* of republicanism ; the fetal and giant strides, sapping the root of subjection, atid aiming at the sacred lives of roy¬ alty, the accumulated sufferings of out¬ raged majesty, were concealed : she heard the monstrous detail, but she wished not to sharpen one pang in a breast which already smarted with the bitterness of sorrow. At home then my thoughts centered m my babe— abroad they pictured nought save De Beaufort. The return of Angerville to the dwell¬ ing of his mother was an event in the epocha of my being, from which me¬ mory will never cease to refer without horror, and without disgust. It was evening when he stole unannounced upon us. The exclamation of my joy was unfeigned ; my heart throbbed with the qtrickened sensation of hope—my eyes turned from him to the opened doorway.— 4C De Beaufort ! my De Beau¬ fort!" I articulated, and tears and dis¬ may
may sueçeeded-*-AJas ! he came not ¿ and not even his letter, not even the foi^i effusions of unabated love, could appela the tumidt of my fedings. In vain Angerville declared the mandates of duty imperative^—in vain I heard of his bravery, bis exploits ; I gazed upon his child, and, as I bushed it on my bosom» my sobs seemed to ask·*—" AATiat man¬ date is half so imperative as nature ?" AngerviUe took my hand: in tlie persuasive language of friendship, he strove to mollify my grief; he spoke to my reason, be besought my fortitude. He told me, in times like the present, the man who could Hve for himself was a recreant to humanity and to lionour ; that the sacrilegious hand of rebellion was levelled at the Hfe of majesty ; that consternation and dismay paralyzed tføe nation ; tbat mock tribunals depopu¬ lated the country, and tbat tlie blood of innocence and honour deluged the streeta qf the capital. Artfully did be recon- i- 4 cile
cife mé to the absence of Eııgehiiıs; and then he spoke of his own short sojourn- ttént ! at* Sehafhausen, as a venturous ävity, secretly to rally the patriotic впа the îoya 1 ; to sift into the minds of men, end to stimmen, in the name of the emigrant princes, those who istili lived to justice and to honour, ' Vam would be my effort to unravel the clue of decep¬ tion and treachery whieh marked his actions: so closely; so thickly, w f as it woven— " That, like tbe tempting fiend to e\iî, He look'd an aţigeî w hübt he play'd a devil." A fortnight passed away, and in An¬ gerville I «aw nought but a duteous son, niti attentive zealous fiiend : he spoke of D$ Beaufort as tbe man he most vølued- upon earth ; he fondled the o&špňng <@f De Beaufort, with a tentteryet tempered interest, wbich de¬ fied ihe* possibility of suspkion. Not the rtíoôt Wž^y coöM havjß dived beneath the
the surface ; no glance of love, no smo¬ thered sigh of passion, betrayed the subtle covering. Sometimes, as though hurried away by his feelings, be would speak ofthe days of his boyhood, of the youthful exploits which marked the early career of Eugenius and himself; yet ever, when I questioned him as to the family of my husband, wotild he^sbrink- ing from all disclosure, hesitate as if fear- fulof being betrayed into indiscretion, and then strive to change the subject, with that precipitancy ivhich evinces some¬ thing to disguise. Alarmed, yet knowing not why, I dared not petition confidence —I dared not surreptitiously obtain* se¬ crets, so long and so carefully withheld. Distrust imperceptibly stole into* my heart; a thousand wild surmises,tortured imagination, and my life became tinged with doubt, conjectuüte, and suspicion. , . Thus wound up to** piteh which artifice had long projected, and for which cold systematic intrigue had diligently toiled, L 5 the
the shaft was deliberately thrown, and the feelings of sensibility outraged, al¬ most beyond the possibifity of endu* ranee« Unmindful of the interest I ex- dted, I was fondling my cherub on my knee, when a heavy sigh awakened me to the presence of Angerville. I looked up—his eyes were fixed upon me—he Jiad been writing: the pen was still in his hand, and his every feature spoke a depression, a gloomy sadness, whkh filled me with dismay. Afive but to one object, I sprung forward—I pro¬ nounced tbe name of Eugenius : a tear trembled in his eye. Again, almost breathless, I repeated the name most predous to my heart : still, still w r as he silent, and when, apparentiy over¬ come by his feelings, he buried his face in his hands, and rushed from the apartment, is it to be wondered tbat 1 should aeize the, half-written letter Mithat I should,eagerly, seek tiie tes- timony of >my own destination ? God
of Heaven ! what a damp—what a cruel murdering damp fell upon my spirits! Eugenius, the being my enthusiasm bad pictured perfect—the father of my babe—the ultimate end of my every earthly hope—Eugenius, fallen, degrad¬ ed, an alien alike to honour and huma¬ nity ! The thought ivas frenzy : I strain¬ ed my infant closer to my bosom—I read and re-read the paper, tiil, turned almost into stone, I sunk on a cbair r gaspingyshuddering,trembling, as tliough the ehill of death was on me. It was a letter to De Beaufort, ivritten with a pen of fire on my brain, for each sen¬ tence is registered deep, eternal, never to be expunged till the busy pangs of memory and Hfe have ceased together 44 AVhy are you absent?" wrote*An* geniile. " Cold insensible man ! what duty ean keep you from a scene Hke this? My eyes now rest on the most perfect of nature's* works I Your Hek- na is fondling her infimt ! The soft tmt τ 6 of
of returning health glow's on her fair diieek ; the bewitching transport of ma¬ ternal love speaks in each animated fea¬ ture. ' De Beaufort— De Beaufort, can I behold Helena—ean I know the worth of Helena, and call you friend ? How could you profane sueh innocence ? how, under a ma^k so specious, beguile a saint from tbe altar, to doom her the hapless, the unconscious victim of unhallowed passion ? Wedded to another, how could you rifle the only blessing of a parents heart?—how could you steal áway a treasure which all the Indias* wealth call ne'er restore? Often does Helena q&éstion me of the days of our boyhood ť How tían I speak of the days of yohr boyhood without coupling the ï&me of Hyacinthe? —and how can I |rtóiïourtce the name of Hyacinthe, Without betraying a discovery, danger¬ ous to the peace, perhaps the life of the deeeived Helena? Oh, De Beaufort! What « task have>you imposed upon friendship í
friendship ! Yet I will be true to that task—I will hide the fatal secret even from my mother^—her love shall be un¬ mingled with pity ; neither shall Helena be awakened by me from that trance of security in whicb her cares are lulled. Fear not to trust me. I will watch over your victim as though she were my sister—I will shield her fremi every insult, and with my heart's blood will I protect her from wrong: nay, though honour shrinks at the appeal, I implore you to hasten to us, for, alas ! such is the spell you hold upon her senses, that Helena knows no happiness in absence. Recall tbe dawn of first impression—» the hour when, kneeling at the altar's foot, glowing in vestal purity, you hailed her as the brightest, sweetest, rarest work in nature ! Still is she as lovely —her cheek as fair—her blush as vivia Ob, Eugenius ! in your apostacy, teach me not to curse the versatility of man.; teach me not to shrink from my owh sex
sex with horror and with disgust Has¬ ten to Sehafhausen ; return to us, I im¬ plore, I supplicate. If merey outlives the reign of passion, condemn not He¬ lena to tbe goading anguish of neglect : remember it is a cold, a rankling chill, whkh congeals every spring of hope ; it is a mildew, a blast wrhkh nips the brightest germ of promise, and doorns the summer of Hfe to joyless, rayless apathy." Such were the insidious lines wbich, acting as a basilisk on my senses, rivet¬ ted my eyes, and turned my biood to ice. Alas! I cannot describe the feel¬ ings of that moment—I cannot dw r eU upon the wild agony which alarmed even the politic Angerville; for not till a flood of tears came to my Edief, could his reasonings or his arguments avail. Stung almost to madness, I would fly my betrayer—I would renounce the world—I would return heart-broken to Sicily. Humbled, contrite, I would kneel
kneel at the feet of my fether—I would implore his pardon and die. Angerville snatched my child—he held it towards me—" And tbis cherub," he articulated, (t this innocent uncon¬ scious babe—who will protect, who will uphold her? doomed to weep o'er a mother's grave, who will avert the sting of a father's indifference ?" I wept—1 clasped my hands in ago¬ ny.—« Think," pursued Angerville, " of the o'erwhelniing load of misery you would heap upon this innocent : unpro¬ tected, undefended, ignorant of a mo¬ tlier's wrongs, alienated from a father's fondness, east upon the ocean of life, in a country convulsed by rebellion, en¬ slaved by policy and faction. Think well, unhappy mother, and if nature flies her charge, curse not the foot whieh tramples down tlie iiead of the bendirig lily," He gazed upon me with eyes which played the partof sympathy even unito life
OF life— hé hdďmy hand with that speak¬ ing pressure of interest whieh saints could not shrink from, 44 Think ľ I repeated, when the heav- ing agony of my bosom admitted words —' 4 Holy Virgin, may tbe foot which tramples down the bending lily, first crush the life's blood in my heart ! No, no ! unconscious offspring of fraud and crime, I will journey with thee in my bosom, and on my knees supplicate a shelter for thy helplessness." « Whither would you wander?" d^ manded Angerville. ** Led away by the heroism of feeHng, whither would you direct your course ?" "To Sicily," I faltered. "Craving the hard crust of eharity r I would beg my way χ beneath the canopy of heaven, I would cradle my babe in my arms ; sleep should not surprise my senses; my tears should fall as the dews of night npon her forehead, nor should I judge my penance equal to my crime." 44 Youi
" Your crimen echoed Angerville. '* Helena, be more just to yourself; in¬ nocence dwells not upon earth, if you are guilty." "Ah !" I resumed, heedless of all save the misery whkh pressed Hke the weight of worlds upon my heart, " the partial band of friendship palliates where it ought to probe, but the still deep voice of conscience tells me the retributive fiat of Heaven is but just" Faint, almost dying, my head sunk upon my hand—I gasped for breath—-I closed my eyes even against the angel form of my child: a cold, a chilHng damp bedewed my frame, and every mortal sense appeared to fail me. The moment of redawning recollection was the moment of despak—I fixed my eyes mournfully on Angerville—my lips murmured reproach, for, alas ! he had rendered me no service in restoring me to life: misery was the sad prospect which
which presented itself—ruin and igno¬ miny tbe dire harvest of disobedience. * 44 How ean I aid you ?" implored Angerville ; ** how can I soften the wretchedness my blind ineaution has created ? Unfortunate, hapless, injured Helena I how can I wipe away those tears of bitter anguish ?—how expunge the black record of De Beaufort's crimes?" He paused, but sobs were my only response,— 44 Speak to me," he continu¬ ed ; 44 tax my friendship—bid me even seal your wrongs with the life's blood of him who was my friend, and such is my detestation of his perfidy, such my veneration of your virtues, that I will not hesitate." 44 You-—you shed the life's blood of my Eugenius!" I wildly exclaimed, snatching away my band wbkh before by Hstless in his ; 4 * you murder De Beaufort ! Avert ! avert the stroke ! 1 do not
not upbraid him with the anguish whkh o'erwhelms me—I have deserved ifc all —I wooed my own wretchedness—I smiled at my own ruin—I abandoned my own father, and steeped bis couch in tears. Angerville," and I sunk tm my knees before bim, " recall the threat. If you have merey, guard the life of Eugenius—spare him to repentance : let time—let reflection awaken remorse. He loved me once," I pursued, soften¬ ing into tears; * 4 my heart tells me tbat he loved me.—Time—time, then, will awaken all : unmoved, he cannot visk the tomb into which his perfidy will have driven me. Oh, may the know¬ ledge of,my sufferings excite in bis breast a repentance so deep, an expi¬ ation so sincere, that the wrath of of¬ fended Heaveii may be softened, and guilt and broken ordinances forgiven !" Angerville wept with me, and even at the moment that he execrated the apos¬ tacy of his friend, he promised all that I desired.
ôemred. Saints of merey ! how was I de¿ tdvëd! how was I beguiled! Seiitîmenté Of heroism, of purity, of matchless friend¬ ship, flowed from bis tongue, veiling tbe Шек, the deceitful purposes of his trea- eheroitø heart He called himself a bro- tfeev~he implored me to trust in a bro¬ ther's zeal—he vowed to guard my in¬ fant with reHgious care, and sacrifice even Hfe itself for my protection. Alas ! hè spoke to feelings warm and ener¬ getic ; be appealed to a heart whieh na¬ ture and entiiusiasm had moulded fo bis purpose : I listened to his arguments— I submitted myself to bis 5 guidance. Swmyed by his superior judgment, re¬ lying implicitly on his honour, I con¬ sented to bide the fetal seeret from bis mother, and to* bury deep in my own bosom the galling discovery of my Wrongs : but ah ! how heavy was the task r *to veil those wrongs—how 1 bitter the conflict within f > nmking under the pressure of* accu¬ mulated
mulated misery, I fled to my owndiam^ ber —I barred myself within its sanctu шу —I felt as one lost, as one whom Heaven had forsaken. The outraged laws of nature rose in array before me* Inexpressible, inconceivable, was the ex¬ tent ofmy grief: all was darkness, dl was despair: no ray of sunshine gave me hope, or lightened tbe horrors of my destiny. The voiee of my father, deep as from the tomb, seemed to call for re¬ ti ibu tion ; again I beard the denounce¬ ment of bis curse, and again was my brain racked almost to madness. But alas ! in the nearly mortal conflict of my feelings, my treacherous heart still dung to my betrayer, and the heaviest w r oe I felt to bear wus the dread of bis apos¬ tacy—Love softened down ail ids crimes, and lent a ready plea for all his artifice ι tiıe name of Eugenius thrilled through every nerve, and banished every sense of anger. In vain I courted sleçp-^mvaaı I dosed my eyes, and wooed ^er balmy influence ;
influefice; busy imagination conjured á thousand projects : thriee in tbe night did I spring from my bed, did I snatdi my cherub, resolving to quit the^weffing of madame Angerville, and midst the din of war,*fc€ysefck my husband. My husband ! the <lra$band of Hyacinthe ! Father of Heaven ! what frenzy—what despair did that name awaken ! Yet would 1 seek him—would I brave the worst calamity whieh could befal me—would I from his own lips demand my doom, and learn ^whether all his vows and all his promises were forgotten. I threw open my window—I bared my burning bosom to the night-breeze —I pressed my hand upon my throb¬ bing temples^—I fixed my eyes upon the east, eager to hail the earliest dawn of mømmg. Ah! how leadened appeared the hours ! how stew, how wearying the flight of time! I heard the distant roar eí the waters, må impiously and irre- ligiøufily did I pine, amidst tbeir waves * ¿ to
to seek a retreat from woe. The dawn¬ ing day still found me the slave of røy own tumultuous fedings : rooted to the window, I watched the rising vapours; and not till the piercing cry of my in¬ fant recalled me to myself, did I per¬ ceive that my own bosom was chilled almost to death. To the inquiries of my hostess, the plea of indisposition was no longer ne¬ cessary ; my scorched liands and heavy eyes betrayed the lurking fever within, and the united offices of skill and friend¬ ship were again essayed. For whole days was I lost to all save bodily pain, my brain racked with de¬ lirium, and each part of my frame feel¬ ing a distinct suffering. The form of Eugenius coloured all my wanderings —the name of Eugenius was the only accent wbich lived upon my Hps : if for a moment ï sunk into slumber, it was to start with fevered agitation—to im¬ plore him not to forsake me— 4o invoke : his
his presence as the only good on this Aide heaven. Pathetic were the incohe¬ rent flights of my delirium—alas I reality gave them colour, and the curse of my father^ and the perjured faith of De Beaufort, pressed Hke burning lead upon my brain.
CHAPTER XVI. +* +*****<******** * I awakened as though from a long sleep, and my intellects were dear, my memory perfect. I looked around ; tlie room was darkened, the curtains of my bed closed, yet I felt a hand grasping mme, as it lay on the coverlid, and I beard a sob which spoke sympathy and feeling. My eyes filled witli tears—•my pube quickened—** 4 Eugenius! Euge¬ nias Γ I artieulated· Ah I in one instant wimt a change did I undergo ! Hke mists before
before the sun, pain and misery vanished —my heart became light and tranquil. It was Eugenius, my own Eugenius, who grasped nry hand, ivho knelt by my bedside, who clung to me for hope and life. Father Omnipotent ! forgive the way¬ ward feeHngs of my weak, my guilty nature! F^ugenius, my betrayer, tbo husband of Hyacinthe, and yet my arms were extended to receive bim ! Nav, even now, humbled as I am to the dust, cleansed, torn from tue snares of tbe ivorld, bating, labouring to expiate the transgression—even now I love, I madly love the memory of the transgressor: woven in the soul's life of my existence, mingling in the vital blood of my heart, he still reigns, nor will he cease to reign, until that heart shall have ceased to pal¬ pitate. If the body should be scourged for the lapses of tbe mind—if penance should succeed the untoward wander- VOL. I, M İlios
iııgş f f>f imagination—sleep should not cloşş a^y eyeHds, nor conch receive my ivi^ţsd; form : oh no, no ! the days, the nights of my mortal pilgrimage, should Ъц all privation, all endurance. But the mercy of Heaven is infinite, and tbat Being, wbo knows all the weakness, ail the infirmity of our nature, will lead us to tbe living spring, and strengthen in our breasts the hopes of righteousness and of faith. Father ! blessed Father ! give me a new heart ! Thou, who canst raise the tempest, and rock tbis globe even to ¡ts foundation—thou, wlio canst bid tbat tempest cease, and soften the wildest blast, even to the ze¡ т -breath¬ ing verdure—thou, who canst despoil rich fields of promise, and cover the bleak and barren rock with the prim¬ rose and the violet! in my heart allay the storm—be my heart the barren rock ! pour upon it the sunshine of thy mer¬ cy—clothe 1 1* íth the gold and purple tissue of thy favour! ·* Helena !
44 Helena! my life? my blessing!* sobbed Eugenius. 44 I have watched by you, and you knew me not; I have wept over you, and you sympathized not Look up, my all on this side hea¬ ven : it is your own Eugenius, your own husband, wbo, spite of every call of duty, comes to tend and to sooth you." 44 My husband—my Eugenius Γ I re¬ peated, shuddering: "where are you? Deceitful phantoms glide before me— shadows mock my sigbt : let me see yoa, let me hear you speak, and then I may believe my happiness, My husband ! my Eugenius ! ivhere tben is Hyacinthe ?" I snatched aside the curtain—I sprang from the pillow—I fixed my eyes on his face: his look, his start was conviction : one instant tbe truant blood flushetl his cheek, the next saw it pale and death¬ like as my own, I drew my hand from his—I wrung them in agony.— " My destiny is accomplished," I articulated ; ** my strength fails me—Oh, my God ! m 2 oh,
oh, my father! wiU not these sufferings expiate all ?" The rush of feeHng was too great; my heart seemed swollen to bursting, and fainting, lifeless, 1 sunk baek on the pfflow. The groans, the mortal anguish of De Beaufort again recalled me to myself: stretched by my side, madly dasping me to his bosom, bis tears deluged my cheeks, and his sobs rose almost to suffo¬ cation. How could I drive liim from nie? —how could I steel my heart to sorrows such as his? The father ofmy cherub—tbe first the dear, the only pos¬ sessor of my virgin faith, doted on with a passion in its excess culpable-the being I had vowed to honour—the being I had never ceased to worship—-how could I banish him ?—frenzied with despair and irrief, Iiow could I renounce him and live? " Oh, stern, unbending virtue !" I eja¬ culated, " what is it you demand ?—what is it you require? If my life, take it in tbe
the struggle ; if my love, an alien, an apostate must I live to tbee !"" The cheek of Eugenius glowed witb exultation and transport.—" Helena ! my own Helena !" he murmured, " not for a diadem would I exchange thy heart! How have tbe wild flights of delirium tortured me r Helena, my soul's hope, bow could you doubt my affection ?~ how for a single moment eould you be¬ Heve I could exist without loving you ? Could you banish me your heart? why then judge me otherwise than by your¬ self?" " AVas it indeed the wild flights of delirium?" I eagerly demanded. ** Is Hyacinthe too tbe conjured phantom of fever ? Answer me, Eugenius—was the ceremony wbich gave me to your arms a mere mockery to betray? or am I in¬ deed your wife beyond all power to se¬ parate?" * 4 Yes, yes, beyond all power to sepa¬ rate," ardently exclaimed Eugenius— m » " the
" the wife of my own soul, the dear* tbe treasured friend of my bosom !" * ť And Hyacinthe?" I emphatieaHy pronounced. " Eugenius, answer me às you hope for the mercy of Heaven, what is Hyacinthe? and what am I?" Eugenius shuddered—he would have shrunk from me, but I firmly grasped his band, and rivetted myeyes upon his vary¬ ing features.— 4i I know there is a seeret," I mournfully continued, " a fetal, fatal se¬ cret ; suspense is torture—give me your confidence, and leave me nought to guess." " Be patient, my love," implored Eu¬ genius, " and when I see you weU, when the rose of health glows on this dear cheek," fondly kissing it, " when our babe slumbers in your arms, I wiU kneel at your feet, and tell you the little his¬ tory of my Hfe. Not a secret shall exist between us : eveiy mystery shall be ex¬ plained ; my heart shall be as open to you as to Heaven, and what your justice must
must condemn, your love, I trust, will pardon. My Helena will be no inexor¬ able judge ; she ivill wipe away the tears from the eyes of her penitent, and re¬ store him to favour and to bliss." Alas ! the appeal was made to a heart which knew no opposition to his wish : my strength too was unequal to any fur¬ ther trial : a sinking languor, a debilita¬ ting faintness, preyed upon my spirits, and I could only press his hand in silent acquiescence. It w r as long ere tbe natural strength of my constitution baffled the fell powers of sickness, ere the gay spring of health redawned : the solicitude of De Beau¬ fort w T as my best antidote; 'tw r as his tenderness ivbieh banished care—'twas he who smoothed my pillow, and stole my mind from every shadow of inquie¬ tude. He was my best nurse, my best physician; his wish was my law, and the nauseous draught of medicine itself came sweetened from bis hand. By M 4 night,
night, by day, he watched over me: sometimes he would awaken every thrill of rapture in my soul, by fondling our cherub, and giving tomy eyes tbat sigbt in whieh sensibility never fails to de¬ Hght, the downy cheek of infancy nest¬ ling in a father's arms: sometimes, al¬ most breathless, he wouid watch tlie calm slumbers of our darling, and kiss her tender forehead, as sbe lay half hid in my bosora ; then gazing in tearful rapture on her features, he would call her his little Eugenia, and bail the first smile of fancied recognition. Ah, those moments ! those transient bUssful moments! How did my weak, my guilty heart, forget every thing it ought to have remembered !—how did it expunge tbe past, and cling to the present ! The claims of Hyacinthe in¬ truded no more—the image of my de-. sérted parent was lost in the dizzy trance of enthusiasm; I saw no other being than De Beaufort-—I thought of no
no other being than De Beaufort: his errors, his concealments, spoke excess of love, and nature pleaded for him in ae* cents so eloquent, that pride, and honour, and every opposing prindple slumbered» He was my world—the stay, the hope, the joy of my existence ! I prayed to Heaven for a continuance of his affec¬ tion—I felt that in the circle of his arms no calamity could subdue me. Alas ľ sucb was the extent of my infatuation,. such the idolatry of my feeHngs, that there was no danger, no privation, no misery, I would not have endured, with him, and for him. Cradled in romance, to love once w r as to love eternally ; and thoroughly am X convinced, the whole world eould not have produced a heart more devoted' than my own : nor must I, in this sad* recitii of my woes, lose sight ofthe then soothing balm to sorrow : De Beaufort loved with a fervour equal to my own ;, my peace, my happiness was all he co¬ veted ;
veted ; ingeniously would he study to beguile me of every care, to banish thought, to dissipate every thing like re¬ flection. If I spoke of Sicily, he would call my ideas into a new channel ; if I reverted to the duties 1 had violated, he would place my cherub on my knee, and whisper the duties of love and nature ; he would support my tottering frame to the window, and pillowing my aching head upon bis bosom, moisten my wasted cheek with his tears. Poor Eugenius! feelingly ivould he accuse himself as the author of my suf¬ ferings, and tben, in all the animated fervour of his warm heart, would he re¬ peat those vows whieh had so fetally won me from my allegiance.—"Helena, my own Helena!" he would exclaim, <s never till I beheld you did I know the exquisite bliss of loving—never knew the refinement of a pure, an eternal pas¬ sion : 'tis you who have taught me the value of existence, 'tis to you that exist- i * ence
ence shall ever be devoted. Ah ! why did I not see you before—But I have seen you—I have dared to love you-^-I have made you my own ; our pleasures, our pains, our hopes, our anxieties, all, all are one. Helena, wiiat tie can be half so strong as that which united us? what ordinance half so sacred as love, pure ethereal love ?" 44 None, none," I murmured : * 4 and now, Eugenius, fear not to trust me; the pow r er of man cannot estrange us : dinging to eadi dearer self, death alone ean dissolve the bonds our hearts have forged. Tell me then the history of your life, and give me a solution of that mystery whieh has so nearly destroyed me. Leave not a dread, leave not a suspidoH on my mind : you know not of what my mind is capable," fordng a feint smile ; 4C tell me then, Eugenius, what the cold caution of friendship re¬ fused to my prayers." And then I re¬ lated my discovery of Angerville'« letter, and
and the self-reproaches whkh that gene¬ rous friend had lavished on his ощш вд- prudence. 44 Poor Angerville!" exclaimed I)e Beaufort u not once, during tiie hours ofyour danger, have I seen him smile; and when the shrieks of your delirium reached his ear, his sufferings endeared him to me beyond all the claims, of early feUowship : »ow those sufferings are ex¬ plained, and my gratitude cojpapkte ; the dread discovery h passed, and your af¬ fection unshaken. Oh, my bve ! how, often has the hated ïwmç of Hyacinthe, rose to my lip&ï— bow often have I pined to open my wbo|e heart to your inspec- tioii ; to reveal evçry error, every secret of my* past Hfe ; to teU ущ th$ frail, the? guilty being you bad taken .to* your bo^ som, and the cruel, the|?a*ba ¿ r#us.aecep^ tion I li^d practised pxi your innocence f. Often, in the moments of fo$d r „epdçar r ment, wouldinclination.have l$mUecl me a sup^iai^at уда £Ы^^оц^4 hayei thrown
thrown off the beavy burden of disguise, and told you how fove, and love alone, had beguiled me : but the dread of out¬ raged virtue awed me; I feared the burst of your indignation—I feared to lose you, Helena, and without you I could not live. Oh! how heavy have been my conflicts !—how torturing, how pungent my remorse !" 44 Think not of past conflicts," I ex¬ claimed, tenderly pressing the hand I clasped in mine : 4< though you w r ere ten times more guilty, thougb your crimes were almost beyond the reach of pardon, yet so irrevocably am I devoted to you, that I can relinquish Hfe, peace, honour, all but affection. It is here," pressing my hand upon my heart, 4ť here, Eugenius, that you exist—tbat you will ever exist, for death alone can obliterate your image, whatever be your crimes, or my own duties." 44 Heroic, generous Helena !" murmur¬ ed De Beaufort, straining me with fer¬ vour
vour to Ыв bosom, 44 now are you indeed mg рщ; ικ>ψ, ip- this Ые^ >hour M confidence, be every past struggle, every weighty secret disclosed;",and then, fix¬ ing his eyes upon my face, as though to note each variation of feeling, be gave me the outline of his Httle story.
END OF VOL. L
j y,. ..ji"'. ,',α „,ΐιίϋ ...... ι " ul' ...... iugu l i ľ i ľ ι " Printe«! by J. Darlt'iMţ, Leadenhall -Street, London. t, I if ' Ί , Ι Ι' ..... -ΊΓΊ ==
