Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The siege of Kenilworth: an historical romance
tío
SIEGE OF KENILWORTH
CHAPTER I
•Ori" ht аь 'he beam of Ins î
Pure -as the tlake on Winter's boat) hrow i Mild as the balmy iùnr^ of rovv bpntiti, She looked—she -amled !"
•Be it our aim,
Го disipate illusion's Mibth Iru« , And rai İyin г back the truant virtues, Give his great heart tuli scope for play." X HE glorious orb of day was setting amid his rich canopy of gold and purple, when Hubert, from the warder's tower, hailed the expected retinue, bearing back Isabel to the home of her youth. His vol. hi. в pulses
pulses quickened ; his heart throbbed with wild and nameless transport: it seemed ás though one bound bore him to the side of his benefactor ; and when at the side cf his benefactor, he could neither fashion thought, or mould one single expectation : a confused, a dizzy crowd pressed upon his brain ; he heard the tread of feet ; he heard the voice of father Gilbert: the door opened: he looked up, buoyant, glowing, anxious to recognise the infant sharer of his pas¬ times :—but ah! how unlike the infant sharer of his pastimes, was the bright vision, which bent at the feet of the ba¬ ron; which, rising, and shaking back her long and glossy hair, turned on him the full blaze of her beauty ! It was the first time Hubert had encountered the witchery of woman : and when he met the sunny eye-beam of Isabel, like unto an April gleam, all radiant in smiles and in tears, it thrilled him with a sensation of mingled disappointment and rapture, ot
of pleasure and of regret. Could it be the same being, who used to nestle in his bosom, sport with him on the lawn, ca¬ ress him to her wildest purpose?—Could it be the fairy child, who had wont to cull the wild flower, and chase the but¬ terfly, so tall, so exquisitely formed; so fashioned, to delight the eye, and reach the heart? He pronounced her name, and then he paused, doubtful and timid; he felt the soil pressure of her hand, and the touch pierced into his soul He had heard De Maudit descant on the beauty of the latly Ingelriea: but he had never seen beauty, never felt beauty, until now; never approached the circlet of at¬ traction ; never dared the talismauic spell which coils around the heart. He saw the transport of the parent, in the humid eye, in the quivering lip of Hans¬ lape: he saw joy beaming in that eye. he heard broken murmurs, expressive of gratitude to Heaven, dying upon that lip. Isabel sat close beside her father, в 2 her
her hand clasped in both his, her head resting upon his shoulder; her feelings, like unto his own, perturbed even to painful agitation ; glowing, blushing, beneath the notice she elicited ; gazing upon his furrowed cheek, his snow- sprinkled head, and weeping as she gazed. "We are changed—both changed," said the baron, deciphering the language of her eye. " Time, my Isabel, in for¬ warding the promises of spring, sober- those of autumn." " Ah, my father !" faltered Isabel, and she shuddered at the anguished sigh which swelled his bosom—" thy life to have been so wretched, mine so blessed ! " The baron clasped her in his arms.— "Jesu grant," be aspirated, "thy life continue blessed ! Jesu grant, the peace of a quiet tome, the sure repose of an unreproving conscience, be ever, thy ma, and thy reward !" The night glooms gathered, amid ea¬ ger
ger enquiry, and unrestrained commu¬ nion, alternately questioning and re¬ sponding. To all of mutual interest, Hanslape listened with a glad and grate¬ ful spirit; to his mother's placid pass from life to eternity ; to her entire re¬ signation, and unmurmuring endurance of every ill, which leadens the burden of age; to her patience, to her submission, to her perfect piety. . " She lives, with God in her heart," said Isabel, " and she tarries her ap¬ pointed hour, with a cheerful and a wil¬ ling spirit." "And she will die, as she has ever lived," observed the baron, " firm in faith, and unerring in principle. Reli¬ gion, my child, is the rock, from which all our prime good springs: we may toil after happiness; we may possess worldly glory ; but all other foundation is sand," The hour destined for repose arrived, and the short, but fervid prayer of the в 3 confessor,
confessor, dismissed them to their seve¬ ral chambers. Hanslape, to school his own grieved spirit ; to offer up thanks¬ givings for his recovered blessing; to reconcile himself to the evil part of his destiny ; to be grateful for the good :— Isabel, to weep out the fulness of her heart ; to repose her feelings, if not her eyes; to muse over her pictured dream of happiness, clouded but by the flight of Margaret, and the stranger absence of De Maudit :—and Hubert, to recall the look, the smile, the image of Isabel, beauteous as the opening rose-bud, gem¬ med in morn's earliest dew ; to marvel at himself, and to muse o'er again, the occurrences of the last few hours. Time which mellows the keenest feel¬ ings, restored the inmates of Hanslape to their ordinary quietude: throughout the household, pleasure, in the daughter's return, did but temper grief at the son's absence: even the aged Geoffry, when gazing on the unconscious ectype of the lost
lost and lovely baroness—when thankful for existing blessings, ceased not to con¬ trast them with the full joy of the past: how then, could the heart of the baron fail to bleed in the utter desolation of his prospects—fail to lament the annihi¬ lation of his hopes? Yet he pronoun¬ ced not the name ever uppermost in his thoughts ; he strove, if not to forget, at least to content himself in the proffered auty οι Isabel and Hubert; in those studied attentions, most precious to tbe reelings; in those nameless offerings of interest, so dear from those we love, so every way fitted to heal the aching wounds of sensibility. Resolute in his struggles, save to the ear of his confes¬ sor, he breathed nought of the ills war¬ ring against his quiet; beneath the smooth surface of content, he tried to si¬ lence every sigh ; beneath the outer co¬ vering of submission, to pen up the per¬ turbed and anguished feelings of his .soul. Not so Isabel: she had heard в 4* from
from father Gilbert, the poison which dashed the domestic cup of the baron ; and though in his presence she wore the ready smile, in his absence she would muse upon the fugitive William, ques¬ tion of his fatal bias, listen to the tale of his wanderings, and shudder at the blank of his estrangement. Perhaps, it was her mingled fears and anxieties which stole upon the feelings of Hubert, which rendered her griefs so precious. and her interest so endearing; some¬ times, she would mingle her tears with his; she would call him by the tender name of brother; she would aid in his most romantic schemes ; she would fan his wildest purpose. " Any thing—every thing, to give peace to my father," she would exclaim —" to reclaim our poor William ;" and then again she would minutely enquire of his strange perversion of principle, and wonder how so short a sojourn a- mong men could have changed and tainted
tainted his very nature. " Methinks, Hubert"-— -and she spoke with artless confidence—" not all the combined powers of this traitorous league, eould have weaned you from your duty." Hubert felt such praise from the beau¬ tiful lips of Isabel as dangerous to his humility, yet he struggled down the rising exultation, and blushed, rather than spoke acknowledgment. " I am sure," she continued, with a deep sigh, " all the sophistry of man, coukl not have reconciled the desertion of my dear father." " I hope not—1 trust not," eagerly ex¬ claimed Hubert ; " I—I------" and then he paused, fearful, in utterly disclaim¬ ing such a possibility, to cast a deeper shadow r on the conduct of his friend. " I would wage my life that it could not " resumed Isabel " No, no, Hubert, not all the force of example, not all the blandishments of entreaty, could have warped your heart." в 5 " We
" We know not ourselves," murmur¬ ed Hubert, turning from the thrilling glance of her eye. " Powerful indeed must be the delusion which thus up¬ holds William in his delinquency." " It must be more than human delu¬ sion," said Isabel, recalling the strange and untoward influence, which had im¬ pelled the lady Margaret de Burgh to wander from the shelter of Nuneaton. God forefend us all! it must be one of the many snares with which Satan entrappeth souls." And then she spoke of the arrival and sojourn of the earl of Gloucester at St. Mary's, and ended by recounting the rapid change in the till then patient and placid Margaret. " The earl of Gloucester !" ejaculated the amazed Hubert, a sensation, scarce to be defined, fading the glow of his cheek ; " the partizan of Leicester, the chief spring in the huge wheel of vio¬ lence and treason." " Aye, De Clare of Gloucester," re¬ sponded
sponded Isabel, " Smitten wellnigh unto death, he craved entrance; and he re- naid- -----" " Would he had been smitten quite unto death !" interrupted Hubert ; " would------" He paused, for reproof rose in his own heart, and reproof too met him in the saddened features of Isabel. " It is not for us to arraign the ordi¬ nances of Heaven," she observed. " How know we, but the scourge be fitted to the trespass? my saintly grandara would say so: and I would fain make you, clear Hubert"—rallying back her wonted smile—"as good, and as holy as herself." " Become you my monitor," implored Hubert, scarce conscious of what he ut¬ tered: " be yours the merit------ «"he he¬ sitated—he ceased. " The merit," echoed Isabel. " Aye, the merit," aiming at cheerful¬ ness, " to winnow the corn from the chaff. But I cry your mercy—I would further в 6 of
of Gloucester. Tell me, my sweet sis¬ ter, did he join in the offices of devo¬ tion ?" " The same God, and Father of all," replied Isabel, '* doubtless, at the same altar, vouchsafed to accept his prayers, as ours." "At the same hour?" fearfully inter¬ rogated Hubert—"did he kneel at your side ? did—did------" ** I can scarce tell you where he knelt," answered Isabel, w for the thoughts can¬ not rest at once on earth and heaven : but this I know, that he poured subtle poi¬ son into the ear of my poor friend ; that he muffled revolt in the die of necessity ; that he softened down guilt itself, and taught her to believe it virtue." "Strange perversion of judgment! dire lapse of grace!" exclaimed the wondering Hubert. ** He dwelt, tong and oft, on her fa¬ ther—on tbe wrongs of the earl of Kent," resumed Isabel ; * and belaboured hard
hard to sap my allegiance, through pity for the earl of Kent's sufferings." She paused, but Hubert spoke not ; he look¬ ed more than thoughtful ; it was deep dejection; it was bleeding, aching com¬ passion which lingered in his eye. " Know you ought of the earl of Kent?" questioned Isabel ; " or, be it one of the arch snares, wherewith to cozen credu¬ lity ?" Hubert struggled down the sudden load at his heart.—" Perfection," he fal¬ tered, " is not of earth : every breathing thing has its shade; and perhaps, 'tis the deepest shade which darkens the glory of the royal Henry. I have heard that the services of the late justi¬ ciary were ill requited ; but I have heard it through a prejudiced medium ; and prejudice, God wot, will saint a devil, and unsaint a saint !" " Then you believe not the strange bad stories of incarceration and wrong?" " I believe that human judgment, is at
at best prone to error; that man, whe¬ ther wearing a crown, or a tattered gabardine, is subiect to the delusions and blindness of the flesh : but when I catch my thoughts wandering against my du'y, I pluck them back with shame and consciousness." Isabel gave no words to her admira¬ tion, but the carnation tint of her cheek, deepening and fluctuating, evinced it past . recall :—Hubert too caught the bright suffusion, and a half sigh escaped him ; he smothered down that sigh, and scarcely conscious of its being, with throbbing pulses, and hurried accents, returned to the theme of Gloucester.— " What said the lady abbess?" he asked; " what thought the saintly baroness?" " They knew the earl of Gloucester," replied Isabel, " but as the wounded candidate for their hospitality. Per¬ haps, the persevering silence of Marga¬ ret, lives the strongest proof of his un¬ due influence/' " Then
"Then she bosomed concealment," said Hubert; "she welcomed the gnaw¬ ing worm of self-reproach, within the sanctuary of her own heart." " Ah ! and perchance our dear Wil¬ liam/' eagerly rejoined Isabel, " like Mar¬ garet, became trammelled in the toil: for sure am I, this Leicester, and Glou¬ cester, leaguing with the evil one, strengthen themselves in the accursed practices of sorcery and witchcraft;— how else, could they set men's wits a maddening, and overthrow the firm po¬ licy of the realm ?" "It is not for us to trace the ramifi¬ cations of their devices, and their presti¬ ges," observed Hubert : " we must pray against the temptations which have so fatally beguiled our friends." " More than pray—we must do more than pray," energetically exclaimed Isa¬ bel ; " we must breast the gathering ruin, and toil out the redemption of the fal¬ len: even I, young, and weak, and a very
very woman, vvould wage much to reach the ear of De Maudit." " You would find him," said Hubert, inwardly shuddering, " the reverse of the De Maudit you once knew." " I would probe him in the name of our father," replied Isabel, " and try whe¬ ther his heart be of flesh or stone." " Perhaps," said Hubert, sorrowfully, memory reverting to the storm of pas¬ sion which had marked their last inter¬ view, " De Maudit has outlived all of fra¬ ternal feeling : bound by some hidden chain, alas ! he is divorced, as it were, from his better self?' " Ah î to restore him to his better self/' pronounced the enthusiastic girl; "to snatch him back to honour ; to give joy to my father ; to bring peace to us all !" ** You guess not the task you would adveßture," remarked Hubert; "yet were the peril, ten times greater, the recompence would repay it all. I have thought of it, Isabel—I will do more than think
think of it; trust me------But yonder comes the baron"—and care quick chan¬ ged to smiles. But though the theme was banished for a season, the remembrance lived in the mind of each :—Hubert, in the more sombre colouring of probability, veiled the risks and the difficulties hemming in ought of approach to the fugitive William :—Isabel, with the tenacity of happiness, clung to all she wished—pic¬ tured all she wished—believed the ap¬ peal scarce made, ere William would again become the inhabitant of Hans¬ lape. The night brought not repose: the busy imagination of Isabel chased sleep: her thoughts, from her father, from her brother, flew back to Hubert, and she wondered at the association : she threw open the casement ; she gazed upon the silver tissue of the moonbeams, and she pictured sounds and sighs in every breeze which gathered. It was a night of
of resplendent glory: the moon saiLd through a cloudless firmament: the very dews, drinking its lucid beams, sparkled as the lamp of the glow-worm. It was not fear which quickened the pulses at her heart, neither was it doubt which chased the blood from her cheek: yet her heart throbbed almost audibly, and her check faded tc snow, as she marked the measured tread of Hubert on the terrace beneath. He seemed tranced in deep musing ; his arms were folded, and a fixed seriousness usurped all of his accustomed cheerfulness; his cheek too looked wan unto marble, for the silvery beams, lighting on his tall figure, and imparting its pale and soften¬ ing light, gave interest to his whole ap¬ pearance ; his meditative eyes were bent upon the earth, and his mind and his soul turned inwards. Isabel feared to breathe; she bent forward, her looks fixed upon him, with an intensity, al¬ most painful to herself; she sought to guess
guess the subject of his musings : и of De Maudit, perhaps he was planning his own departure from Hanslape ; perhaps, rushing into peril, he was about to with¬ draw himself from the peaceful home of his infancy. " Ah ! should it be so," she murmur¬ ed, her very spirit quailing at the possi¬ bility, " who will soften the blow to my dear father? who will uphold my cou¬ rage in the desertion ?" Tears flooded her eyes: the picture was lone and desolate, and it needed more than her slender stock of fortitude to brave even its anticipation : many forebodings, many regrets, many pain¬ ful reminiscences arose : like the rain¬ bow's vivid tints, her hopes had been bright, unstable, unreal : she had sought true happiness in the paternal dwelling, and she already found, the reality as un¬ substantial, as when within the walls of St. Mary's convent. Alas, poor Isabel í she had yet to learn, that in this our thorny
thomy pass to the grave, happiness, the toü, of youth, of puberty, and of age ; theioseof promise; the high pharos, pointing our wishes and our aims— brightening in distance ; as the meteor's subtle tire, eludes our grasp, cozens our researches, and leaves us in the maze of our own wanderings ! The measured tread of Hubert on the beatened rampart below, in the stilly calm of night, had something solemn in it : Isabel's spirits died away ; yet she shrunk deeper within the shadow, when he paused, as though the murmur of her sigh had reached him : it was fancy all—for he advanced without once rais¬ ing his eyes. " It is not of me he thinks," mused Isabel, and then she wondered at the cold pang of disappointment which suc¬ ceeded; wondered why his actions should engross her thoughts; why his griefs should press so heavy upon her quiet The
The midnight hour chimed, and she softly withdrew from the casement she sought her pillow, but it was strewed with thorns ; she prayed Heaven's favour upon all, but Hubert lingered longest in her heart. Her sleep was not as heretofore; it was broken and pertur¬ bed : vague and empty visions flitting before her ; w¿ld cataracts, fordless floods, unbroken solitude, shoreless oceans, un- fathomed vallies, like drifting clouds, scudding athwart her fancy : now the roar of mighty thunders ; now the din of hostile arms : blood, and death, and horror, commingling; and flames, and persecutions, and despair, crowding to the despite of life. It was Hubert, who lay gasping beneath the sword of Wil¬ liam ;—it was the heavy groan of her father, which snapped the shackles of sleep. She started—she arose-—she hurried to the casement—she gazed on the rampart beneath, but her eyes met not the vision of her fancy. AU was still
still and ealm : " night was at odds with mornmg ;" for the saffron glow of the east was well^io-h doubtful " It is a dream ! thank God, it is a dream!" ejaculated Isabel, yet her limbs shook like the leaves of the aspen, and her breathing was laboured and convul¬ sed. It was a dream, which the fiend, civil discord, rendered possible; a dream, which the troubled state of England might realize—Hubert, enrolled in the ranks of his duty—William, madly wedded to the hostile cause. A sick¬ ness, as of death, stole over her ; a cho¬ king, stifling, suffocating mist, shrouded her eyes: it was a misery, too pungent for human strength; it was a picture of such irremediable desolation, of such utter forlornness, that to dwell upon it was frenzy : she prayed for composure ; she struggled hard for quietude; yet she crept back to her pillow with a troubled fancy ; and not till the balm of tears relaxed the burning anguish of her brain,
brain, did despair vanish, did hope, that divine essence, rekindle into being. Hubert—like unto herself—was the slave of new thoughts and new anxie¬ ties: he had sought the rampart, be¬ cause reflection, like a busy host, was wakeful ; because the blessing of father Gilbert, had not, as it was wont, brought peace to his mind. The medi¬ tations which Isabel had conjured for him differed little from those of reality : it was De Maudit, on whom his aching fancy rested; it was the associates of De Maudit, the wild persuasion, the danger¬ ous example, leading and luring into crime, which chased all of cheerfulness from his brow;—it was the dread of hereafter misery, coupled in the heroic darings of De Maudit : for experience told him, De Maudit would be no luke¬ warm auxiliary in any cause he advoca¬ ted : his nerve 'of fire—his eye of flame, forbade ought of supineness, ought of languid inanity ;—-he would aid in the mad
mad enterprises of Leicester ; he would adventure the mistaken bent of patrio¬ tism, in despite of death ! If a brighter vision floated, it was the peerless image of Isabel; yet in associating with the image of her brother, it excited no a- larm: the strange disturbance he expe¬ rienced, when he recalled her smile, and lingered o'er her loveliness, was but the tribute due to admiration. Beamy, bright, in all which stamps youth capti¬ vating; hope, quickening the illusions of fancy, sparkling in her full-orbed eyes, and deepening the carnation tints of her cheek, she had broken upon his senses; she had dawned, like the radiant vision of another world; she had brought healing on her wing; she had chased the tear, and lured tîıe smile; and if not content, she had planted, at least, the semblance of content, upon the brow of the baron ! Was it othr than nature to be grateful?—was it less than bare acknowledgment, to muse on a medium
medium so conciliating? Had Isabel been stricken in years—been maimed, and blind, and unsightly—Hubert fan¬ cied the like tribute had been due : but whether that full and entire tribute had been paid, he sought not to question: certain it is, she lingered in his thoughts —she mingled in every illusive dream : the mild glories of her eye ; her voice of melody ; her smile of sweetness, sof¬ tening every local ill, and giving peace and comfort to his spirit : he read nought save sisterly affection, İn the ex¬ tended hand, in the glad smile, in the glance of welcome, ever greeting his ap¬ proach : and such was his perfect inex¬ perience of love, his total ignorance of the master-passion, that he classed all her favour to the score of genuine com¬ passion, and native kindliness, for his unconnected and isolated state ! " She knows me the foundling of her father's bounty," he would articulate; and then he would muse upon the mys- voL. m, с terious
terious incident of the copse-wood ; he would ponder upon the awful obscurity which involved his destinv : a thousand vague surmises wouid anse ; a tnousand conjectures, almost too wild to embody ; worlds would he have given to have raised the veil ; to have penetrated the misty incertitude of his claims and his prospects ; to have known, whether he were indeed orphaned—whether he stood alone in the wide universe—or, whether the impelling link of consan¬ guinity, bound him to home and to kin¬ dred : yet, was the dearest ahn of his life, was the coveted meed for which he laboured, the restored serenity of his be¬ nefactor : it was the burden of his bightly prayers; it was the vision of his daily dreams : for such was the force of í ratitude upon his pure and warm heart, that all of self was lost, in his love, and in his reverence, for the being, who uom the hand of a stranger, had accept¬ ed, and scrupulously fulfilled, a trust so question-
questionably and mysteriously imposed, it was study for the comfort and the well-being of the baron, w hieb made him wakeful; which led him to tîıe terrace, rather than to the repose of his o w n cham¬ ber; it was to fashion into something like order, the wild project, to which the words of Isabel had given rise ; to recall, again and again, the last interview with De Maudit, and to ponder well upon the point most vulnerable to attack. His feelings !—alas ! his feelings hurried him to little short of madness. Ills pride! —-his honour! Hubert started in wild affright: pride and honour were no lon¬ ger poised in the like balance-— De Mau¬ dit held them pledged to the perverted call of patriotism-—Hubert judged them, " grappled with hooks of steel," to the claim, and to the cause of loyalty. It was, as the members warring against the body ; it was utter, it was irremedi¬ able ruin, egged on at the pitiful goad- ings of despite ; it was individual ran- c 2 cour
cour waging against public peace; it was the fiend-like complottings of am¬ bition, aiming at the overthrow of order. Hubert saw not the glory of the hea¬ vens—felt not the balmy breeze, laden with sweet odours—heard not the wait¬ ings of the melancholy night-bird- dreamt not, that Isabel, like unto a ho¬ vering spirit of love, beheld and sympa¬ thized in his meditations—noted not the mild splendour of the moon, mellowing all of earth's beauties-—perceived not, i'---------—Xhe Hooi ot lieav'-i, Thick inlaid with puMie*· oí brighi noh! His thoughts—his soul was anchored on the fortunes of William ; his hopes—-his imagination, freighted in the like bark, and launched on the like tempestuous ocean : he would seek him : he would strive to lure him back to peace; totter¬ ing upon the slippery verge of a deep abyss—impelled to the very brink—it was friendship, it was cool self-sacrifi¬ cing friendship, to snatch from the deadly
deadly leap :—and Hubert would extend that friendship;—he owed it to the phi- Janthropy of the father, to save from the trammels of guilt, the self-devoted son :—he would hie to the castle of the lord Fulk de Pagenel, and tracking the footsteps of the fugitive William, again set his deeds in array before him ;—he would point out the mighty ruin, and probe him in the overwhelming curse of a lather's stricken heart. Such were the ruminations, which saddened his features ev en to gloom ; which stole from youth, its .smile of brightness, and gave to his form and movements, the moody stamp of sorrow : he bore it with him to his cham¬ ber; and not till he had committed his thoughts, and cast his burden upon the great Physician of our souls—not till long after he had wooed his pillow, did he sink into that calm slumber, which conscious virtue, and upright integrity, rail not to bestow.
г 3
CHAP.
CHAPTER II.
« —-----__----- ir iStţ t jj e£îi Hubert ! Like to a well »n a sandy desert, Thou impartent drink—spiritual drink—- When the spring of my own blood raileth !" "------------------Nought, ьа\с ïcrip and stan ; Nouebr else; and gratitude will give me spur. Far аь the bounds of ocean.'* The tleep interest, augmented in the persevering silence of De Maudit —in the mutual desire, to relieve, and to solace, the woes of the baron—imparted delusive colour, to that grow ing avidity, with which Isabel and Hubert sought and coveted the converse of each other. It was to revise, again and again, the occurrences of the labt few months—to enlarge upon the enormities of the fe¬ derate barons—4o enumerate the threat¬ ened
ened ills of civil war —to mourn over the corroding sorrows, heaped upon a parent's heart : and sometimes, forgetful even of those sorrows—forgetful of every existing ill—to retrace the days of child¬ hood; to wander again amid the joys of early intercourse, the confidence of af¬ fection, the innocence of childish hope; to kindle, in the pure glow of past en¬ dearment, the magic, the tmguessed-at fire of love : and so stealing, so traitor¬ ous, was the advance, that neither dreamt of danger ; so subtle was the sway, that neither pictured harm. Destiny, classed by the graceless and unthinking zealots of this world, under the head of chance, in the sudden and acute illness of the baron of Hanslape, cast Hubert and Isabel, within the dangerous sphere, of the same hopes, and fears, and sympa¬ thies. The one duty chained them to the one station : for though father Gil¬ bert was the kind and skilful leech, it was Hubert and Isabel, who watching с 4 the
the sick couch of the invalid, contri¬ buted to his comforts, and administered the draft, distilled, from wild flowers and simples. Mutual dread, and mutual interest, imperceptibly tightened the rivets of affection ; tenderness grew out of intercourse; looks, and language, softer, and more familiar, insensibly es¬ tablished itself between them : it was mo.e than the love of a brother, guised beneath a brother's love; it was more than the devotion of a sister, lurking beneath the covering of a sister's pri¬ vilege, The growing faction of party ; the gathering storm, lowering over the glory of England; the increasing strength of the hostile cause, and the fast-decli¬ ning influence of the misguided Henry, were altogether lost, in local and im¬ pressive interest : even De Maudit failed to awaken the sigh and the tear; for apprehension and anxiety for the safety of the baron, was the one predominant feeling within the castle, banishing ought of
of peace, and trancing all alike in awe and consternation. It was the soothing condolence of Hubert, which lightened the load of Isabel's sorrow ; it was the tender accents of Isabel, which was as healthful music to the sick spirit of Hubert; it tranquillized all his agita¬ tions ; it felt to banish every image save her own: perhaps they sought not to analyze their feelings, fearful of deci¬ phering a devotion not to be mistaken : certain it is, love, with all its perplexities and wishes, lived in their hearts; and tlie gloomy shade of the baron's cham¬ ber, fanned and strengthened it into Hame. Theirs, were the same vicissi¬ tudes of hopes and dreads, of doubts and anticipations ; the same aching anxieties, the same spontaneous impulses; theirs, the mute commune of looks, the silent appeal, in which intercourse, reaching not to sound, drew them closer together —establishing a trust in each other's e 5 sentiments,
sentiments, and inviting a confidence in each other's affection. The long fortnight, of suffering to the baron, and dread to the household, wore away, and the black and lowering clouds, dissipating, gave place to a brighter at¬ mosphere : thanksgiving and joy spoke in every visage : Isabel's cheeks, were as spring's dewy blossoms, radiant in smiles and in tears ; her spirits, alternately ele¬ vated in gratitude, or snatched back to care, in the continued alienation of De Maudit. Often, would she contrast, his unnatural neglect, and wilful negli¬ gence, with the mild obedience, and persevering duty of Hubert ; so gentle. so watchful, so care-fraught; striving to pay back his load of obligation, by that incessant nameless homage, which the heart prizes, as the hearťs unvitiated offering :—often, would she muse on past and present; vvould she recall the years spent in the cloister of St. Mary's : pouring forth the sweet incense of praise ; joining
joining in the psalmody of grateful tri¬ bute, and content in the passive blank of negative virtue : now, how opposite her feelings ! how inexplicable her hopes ! wild and visionary, outstripping pro¬ bability, and soaring on the eagle-pinion of romance. Hubert too wondered how care could assail him—yet care grew in despite of wonder—he hailed the pinky tint of rallying health, dappling once more the countenance of his benefactor; the intellectual ray, illumining his late dim eyes—yet anxiety mingled with his gratitude, and inquietude dashed his joy. Even on the step of the altar, when joining in the solemn offices of devotion, his eyes and his heart would wander; Isabel, rivetting the one, and fitful and wayward wishes, luring and trammelling the other: he had plunged, alas! into a thorny maze ; he had quaffed the sw r eet bitters of passion, and when he awaken¬ ed, it was to execrate his own temerity, and shudder at the desolation of his own с 6 hopes—-
hopes—to start back from the precipice on which he tottered—to rend away every flower, which had muffled and guised the dizzy steep,. It w T as tiie voice of the baron, which, like a necromantic spell, dissipated the vapoury mists cloud¬ ing his pure reason; it w r as the impul¬ sive action of the baron, which stirring up a wild tumult in his breast, snatched the fillet from before his eyes, and con¬ vinced him of the culpable delusion under which he laboured. An evening of balmy brightness—a breeze, freighted with the rich frankin¬ cense of nature—an horizon, illumined by the dying glories of the west, had tempted the baron beyond his accus¬ tomed limit. Isabel gently hinted at return; but supported by her on the one side, and the stronger arm of Hu¬ bert on the other, he had smiled at the nominated hardihood, and ventured an¬ other turn upon Ше rampart. He was still enfeebled with lassitude and debi¬ lity ;
li ty ; but as his eyes scanned the pre¬ parations for defence, as he measured the moat beneath, and saw the weapons of (hath thick ranged m portentous order, his cheeks flushed a deeper co¬ louring: his spirits seemed to rally above the pressure of local ill. All of the parent yielded to the veteran soldier: it was the field of his early prowess, which liv td in hls* imagination; it was the sacking of the citv of Lincoln, the de- feat of prince Louis of France, which swept the full tide of exultation over individual mourning. '· Come when they may," he ex¬ claimed. ** we will give them a warm grec ting : be their ranks ever so swollen, t lu y ^hall find us staunch in the cause of our duty." ■· í doubt, they will never put us to the test," observed Isabel, mentally erecting security on the natural interest of De Maudit " And vs hv not r ' asked the baron. •w' " It
" It is not insignificance"—and he glan¬ ced exultingly around—" which can screen Hanslape from the peril" " No, not insignificance ; but—but—" she hesitated. " The lady Isabel would say," re¬ marked Hubert, entering with painful avidity into her feelings, " that the peaceful tenour of our lives is a sure in¬ demnity." " A brief—brief season," resumed the baron ; " it must give place to energy and to action ; it must pass away, like the glory of yon fading clouds." " And leave a calm, as unbroken; a prospect, as resplendent!" said Isabel, alluding to that store of fortitude and resignation, which Christian piety faileth not to impart. " There spe>ke my ghostly mother !" exclaimed the baron, and his kindly glance flooded the eyes of Isabel : she pictured danger to those she loved ; she pictured all that civil war can paint of horror ;
horror : the strife of kindretl ; the hostile contest of father and of son ! Hubert, had no eyes, save for her emotion—no sympathy, beyond the sighs which pierced from his ear to his soul ; yet he spoke not—he dared not trust himself to sneak: and when a^ain the baron continued: " Her chastened spirit, will plead for tıs —pray for us—weep for us !" he .started, as though forgetful of his proximity. " When I reflect upon the strange vicissitudes of my past life," pursued the baron ; " upon the woes, in which my sun of bliss has long since set ; upon the scapes and hazards, war¬ ring against peace and security ; upon the evil propensities of my own rebel¬ lious and wicked nature—I can but wonder at the clemency vouchsafed, at the hoard of grace, at the patient for¬ bearance, which deprecates the sin, and spares the sinner. Saints and martyrs! when I call to mind the seventy times seven I have offended—when I sum up the
the blood guiltiness of my own deeds— I feel, as though the teeming measure poured molten lead and sulphur on my bruised and stricken spirit !" " Alas! my father/' sighed Isabel, " j r ou would be gentle, forgiving, to every human being—you would dis¬ tribute mercy to all, save self." " Because I feel myself the veriest wretch living," mournfully rejoined the baron ; " because I feel, to have muffled the talent, to have sinned against the noonday light of my ovvn judgment * When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it/ Ah, my children ! thou, Hubert—and thou, Isabel—what¬ ever be the die of thy future lives— whether they be cast in sunshine, or in eloud—remember, that vows to heaven savour not of the vows of this world Γ " Another theme—another subject/' implored Hubert. " Dear, dear sir, let us of ought save the past" " Of the future, then," said the baron, faintly
faintly smiling—" of the future, I would fain speak—that is, I would soften the present pang, in providing against the threatened evil. Life"—and he spoke with impressive solemnity—" at best, is man's, slightest, feeblest hold: it may be protracted through years of endur¬ ance ; it may be severed in the moment of fancied security : destiny lies beyond human ken : it is not for us to raise the veil, or penetrate the hidden mysteries of o'erruling Providence." " "What mean you, my father ?" and Isabels looks betrayed awe and doubt. " 1 mean, that we are frail and pe¬ rishable in ourselves," resumed the ba¬ ron ; " that our very strength is weak¬ ness ; our boasted wisdom, folly ; that however, we may compute and reckon on years to come—how r ever, we may yield our hearts to the rosy ^etters of bliss—Fate may clip the reckoning— Time must nip the roses." " Yet tell me," demanded Hubert, "is
*' is it nature, to hang cypress and rue on youth's anticipations ?" " No, not nature," replied the baron ; *' dizzy and buoyant, nature, in league against us, w r ould but wed to this illu- . sive world;—it is nature which needs the check-rein ;—it is fitful uncurbed na¬ ture, which hurries into snares. Should you e'er catch your thoughts wandering against your duty ; should you e'er sur¬ prise your feelings warring against your principles, think of me—think of the weighty recognition—think of the pangs of unavailing remorse, of the bluntless barb of comfortless despair. Wilful omission swells into crime ; persevering negligence, blisters the pure calm of conscience/' " Think of you, my lord," faltered Hubert, his heart throbbing, his cheeks glowing—" ah ! whilst I have life— whilst I liave memory ! Think of you— honour you—reverence you, next to Heaven !" The
The impulse, the act, was one: the baron snatched a hand of each ; he stood for a moment, as though wrestling with his own feelings, then abruptly placing them in each other-—" Both—both, my children !" he articulated—" my depend¬ ance! my trust!" and his own suffused eyes blinded him to the wild and palp¬ able emotion, which rose almost to agony. Isabel trembled, and from crim¬ son faded to snow—Hubert met her " eyes of dewy light," and his very pulses throbbed audibly. The veil was rent away ; the elelusion, which had blinded him to her beauty and to her power, vanished: he felt himself influenced by other than bro¬ ther's interest : he saw her bashful timid struggles more than equivocal; and though transport thrilled his whole frame, it was a transport mingled with misery ; a rapture, tempered with grief. Perhaps, quick and dangerous sensibi¬ lity, had defied ought of self-possession ; perhaps,
perhaps, dazzled by the sway of angel loveliness, softened by the reciprocity of sentiment, influenced by the impulsive workings of soul, confession had fol¬ lowed discovery—repentance had fol¬ lowed confession—but the voice of the baron called him back to reality ; the voice of the baron, dissipated the snare trammelling discretion. " Hubert," he emphatically pronoun¬ ced, " should the days of my pilgrim¬ age on earth be wearing to a close, be unto my Isabel a protector; promise me, to shield, to defend, to hem her in from harm : should Heaven will that I quick return to dust, bear her back to Nuneaton ; give her to the church ; con¬ fide her------ ■" He ceased, for the start of Isabel was well nigh palsied; her cheeks, her lips, grew bloodless; she breathed no plaint, but terror and supplication spok'ľ in her eye. Hubert too caught the dire infection ; a universal trembling seized him; his heart grew sick—it drooped—
drooped—it felt to die in his bosom. " Alas !" pursued the baron, gazing al¬ ternately upon each, " what may reality prou u ce, Wiien uåre anticipation scares so fearfully ! My son—my dear son, 'tis support and resolution I vvould crave from thee! The time may chance, when prompt decision may be called for : it is not death, or woe, or overthrow, should shake a soldier's fortitude. Nay, nay, and thou too, my Isabel, recall the les¬ sons of thy spiritual mentors ; the hopes of grace; the promises of redeeming love. Bear in mind, the meek confor¬ mity, the patient acquiescence, required in our Christian calling : take comfort, dear one, we part on earth, to meet in bliss eternal ! we suffer here, to gain an inheritance hereafter ! Precious be these proofs of love, yet could I wish them tempered with moderation and submis¬ sion !" Hubert breathed more freely—Isabel too looked up, and tried to smile : his was
was the feeling of reprieve, known to the condemned and hopeless ; hers, the struggle of native modesty, fearing to betray the trammei of the heart: and though her conscience smote her, yet did she joy in the misconception of the baron : his death was as a mortal stab to peace ; but her return to Nuneaton, her possible inauguration as a sister of St. Mary's, was total annihilation to hap¬ piness. When in the gloom of her cloister ; when surrounded by all, to charm and rivet enthusiasm ; awakened by the psalmody of praise, and lulled to rest by ensamples of quietude and god¬ liness, a something within, a force, im¬ perative and resistless, combated the efforts of fanaticism, baffled the language of persuasion : and now, that she had passed the boundary—now r , that she had broken upon the world—that world, converged in the little barony of Hans¬ lape, seemed decked in colours, so bright and dazzling, so dear to the heart and to
to the fancy, that to relinquish it, to forego its charms and its claims, to re¬ turn to the drear blank of inanity, to the smrit-numbinff influence of forbear- ance and privation, was worse than death—worse than all the threatened ills, dark and jaundiced melancholy could conjure. She stole a sidelong glance at Hubert, and she read in his half-averted, softener* eye, the confirmation of reciprocal feel¬ ing the melting, stealing evidence, which nature owns, ere yet the lips breathe utterance;—the thrill of bliss returned —the rosy blush, flushing, and fading, and dying, like the glories of the west —the fluttering sigh, scarce rising into sound—the souľs ethereal ray, bright and evanescent as summer lightning! and had the baron lived for intercourse and for observation, that blush, that sigh, that lambent fire, had left no room to guess at :—as it was, he believed her the slave of a sensibility, dangerous and torturing ;
torturing; alive to filial love, and ac¬ tuated by hydra fears, and gloomy prog¬ nostics. He paused at the extremity of the rampart, and supporting himself against the low parapet, placed his hand upon the arm of Isabel, and drew her close beside him. " I would fain make thee a heroine, my girl," he exclaimed, rallying some¬ thing like cheerfulness, " for the dames of Britain, lacketh alike, heroism and resolution. God's truth ! the manufac¬ turing of partiets and coifs, must be changed for scarfs and banners." " What if I embroider one for thee, my father?" " Aye, and one for Hubert also,' rejoined the baron : " thou must bedeck his maiden enterprise with one of thy brightest fancies. Be it the rose of pro¬ mise, my Isabel, crowned with wreaths of coveted lau: el." " And for thee, dear sir ?" asked Hu¬ bert The
SIEGE' OF KENILWORTH. The baron paused; he evidently smo¬ thered down the rising grief, then, with a heavy sigh, replied : u Mine, must be a sun, half set in clouds, begirt in cy¬ press and rue; for sad must be my hour of surest victory !" William was the as¬ tounding ghost which scared his dreams of glory—William was the bitter alloy, to all his hopes of conquest. Hubert guessed it—felt it. " The field be for abler aspirants," he exclaimed: " good, my lord, content with the luxuriant harvest of past lau¬ rels, youth and strength must alone dare the venture." " Not so, my son. In the field, the better sword must shew the abler man. Beshrew me î though old, and grey, and tempest-tossed, here's mettle still ;" and he placed his spread hand upon his heart, and looked and felt the warrior. " Think you, dearest father," ques¬ tioned the timid Isabel, u the conflict will reach Hanslape ?" vol. in. d " The
" The darings of wicked men are hard to limit," observed the baron : " man, at war with his own honour, and madly casting off the heaven-prescribed duty of homage and obedience, plunges into enormity, nor suffers the blackest tur¬ pitude to stay his progress. Crime, my child, has its gradations: the human heart becomes hardened by example and by habit: for the man, who sheds the blood o( his fellow, begins his career, with a mere trespass. Thy innocence can ill resolve the subtle workings of chicanery ; can ill conceive, the despe¬ rate strides of habitual depravity—God grant, it never resolve, it never feel them ! for the heart, laid waste by guilt and hardihood, is sure, of all wrecks^ the most sad, the most desolate !" He shud¬ dered as he spoke ; his lifeblood seemed to chill at that total wreek he pictured; he pronounced not the name of De Maudit, though 'twas evident, De Man¬ dit furnished the original. " Dear—
" Dear—dear father," pressing his hand to her lips, and gazing tenderly in his face, " here, at Hanslape, hemmed in by affection, protected by you and Hu¬ bert, what, save security, can your grate¬ ful Isabel feel ?" " It is the power, not the will, I question," said the baron. " Even in life, we guess not the contingencies warring against peace: in death, my child, the power and the wall alike closes ------" Again the smile and the glow fled the features of Isabel—" I would not scare thy cheerfulness," resumed tiie baron : " but ill would it betide, to tarry the shout and the din of conflict Ere I give form to my wishes, my heart is replete with Heavens mercy—I feel it in every breath I draw—I acknowledge it in the proîengthened period for re¬ pentance. The shades of death encom¬ passed me : they have passed away, and my mind, and rny body, rallies. I may n 2 Hve
live to see, the lions of England, trample down rebellion and anarchy ! I may live to see, my gracious sovereign, triumph o'er the graceless renegades to his high •iuthoritv ! or, I mav die this night, now, upon this terrace. Have we not alike watched the transit of the sun ? have we not seen him dip behind his burnished curtain? but who, of the three, dares count upon his rising ? It is a sad, a mournful conviction ; but life is made up of uncertainty and change: not the flitting shadow—not the beam of lightning, which is seen, and is then no more—not the ephemera of a sum¬ mer's day, can be too brief an emblem. Hubert, I would give thee the guardian¬ ship of Isabel—I would apprize thee of mv anxieties—I would fain quell the rising fears of my ovvn heart, by pro¬ viding against all possible obstacle to my first wish. It may so lidi, that the pas¬ sage to Nuneaton, may be barred by foes and traitors; for alack! in War¬ wickshire,
wickshire, as in Buckinghamshire, many a hornet's nest, lies warm and ripening. Should it prove so; should storm and peril ari г, and my voice be silenced, and the holy Gilbert far distant, then bear her to I vingo ; consign her to the Benedictine sisters of St, Margaret and čt. Nicholas; or to------" " Not—not a nun; say, not a "un, my father 1 '' and Isabel, snatching his arm, sank sobbing at his feet. The baron cast on her a look of ap¬ prehension and dismay,—" What do I hear? Virgin Mother!" he ejaculated, ** where, but in thy keeping, should the innocent seek rest?' " Not a mm'—oh, say not a nun Г agc/m imploıcd Lsabel. 4Í I liked it not at Si. Mary's—and now, my father, I had rather death." The baron step] æd fearfully back: it seemed, as a new unguessed-at trial, threatening to engulph and overwhelm. ·' Wiiat am I to learn?" he demanded; n 3 " be
" be brief, girl ; torture me not with suspense " Still Isabel clung to his knees; she spoke not, but she looked up in his face, with «such mild persuasion, such thrilling confidence, that the frown vanished, and a smile, the sunshine of the soul, redavvnccl " I would know all—I would hear all," urged the baron ■—"answer mc, babel what am I to learn ?" " Xothing—nothing, my father, save j , that my heart is wedded to thee." ** But should Heaven call me hence J " Then—even then'—and half bury¬ ing her fair face in her bosom, her raven locks, in wild redundance, veiling her blushes and her tears—" even then, dearest father, I would be ought other than a nun/* The baron >tood motionless and grief- struck—all his plans for security baffled —all his reliance 1 , hmken and destroyed. " Blind, unthinking Isabel !" he at length exclaimed, "thou knowest not the dan¬ gers
gers thou wouldst so rashly dare. The time may chance, when safety dwell but within the church's holy precincts; when virtue, scared and persecuted, may find no shelter, save in a cloister's gloom. Thou art a novice: in the strife and rage of party, thou measurcst hu¬ man actions by the gage of thy own inexperience—God forefend thy inexpe¬ rience! hurry not into snare: aid me, Hubert; we must urge to her own true peace; we must silence all her misplaced prej ud ices/' Hubert stooped; he strove to raise her, but his limbs, his lieart trembled, like unto her own. r * Not a mm/" again faltered Isabel, re¬ pulsing all bis efforts, and still clinging to the (eet of the baron—-"give me to death, my father,rather than to despair. Oh ! you cannot tell," she wildly pursued, " the blank- the fearful blank of such a sacri¬ fice! you cannot guess·——" She ceased —her voice died in sobs—but she crept the closer, clung the tighter to his knees. d 4 All
All of the parent felt subdued : the melting, yielding heart of the baron, spoke in his eyes, and in his words.— " Enough, my child," raising her to his bosom ; " if I cannot persuade, I will not tyrannize. Come d;y up thy tears : if thou wilt not become a nun, thou must, at least, become the charge of our Hubert. He will not scare thy spirit, dearest, and will act by thee in time of need." " So may Heaven help me !" emphati¬ cally pronounced Hubert, placing his spread hand upon his breast, yet not daring to steal one glance at her he loved. " Art thou satisfied, my girl ?" asked Hanslape. " Art thou willing, should the thread of my life be sud¬ denly severed, to yield to the firmer judgment of thy brother Hubert?—to look up to his arm of strength, and to his heart of vigour ; to be guided by his advice ; to conform to his opinions ; to
to do nought, in lieu of the holy Gil¬ bert, unbiassed by his counsel ?" " Aye, my father, and I will swear it on the Evangelists !" whispered Isa¬ bel, caressing him in her turn, and gem¬ ming, in tears of tenderness and grati¬ tude, the heightened roses of her com¬ plexion. "But why conjure ought so mournful ? Hubert shall be my mentor; but not, I pray thee," rallying into play¬ fulness, " until his judgment be as staid, and his locks, as bleached as thine own/* The baron attempted to smile ; he stroked back her glossy locks ; he fondly kissed her cheek ; then, relapsing into care-— ifc Should war and turmoil molest the peace of our dwelling," he askeel— " should Hanslape no longer yield secu¬ rity, wilt thou not shrink from the asy¬ lum a brother's prudence may advise?" " No, not if it be temporal, my father ; not unless he will me a prisoner for life." "Then am I satisfied," pronounced the baron. " Not a nun, my Isabel, but D& to
to the sure asylum of a nunnery. In everv chance and change of this che- quered life—in the battle's heat, should Heaven so will it—on the grave's slip¬ pery brink, this accorded bond of reliance and of acceptance"—and again he placed the hands of Isabel and Hubert in each other—" will be my comfort and my solace !" How% but in love—in more than brother's love—could Hubert resolve, the strange wild commotion, the alter¬ nate ice and fire, rushing through his veins; the trepidation, lhe mingled rap¬ ture and despair, pursuing to his lone chamber, and steepinrr his future pros¬ pects, in sunshine and in shade; now, glowing, buoyant, dizzy, in the flights of fancy, wooing the fairy imagery of delight; love, yclepedfriendship, expand¬ ing his whole soul, imparting colour to his whole feelings, all of alloy, oblitera¬ ting; and hope, chasing every darkening vision ! His, was generous ardour: his, was
was sanguine youth, parcelling the allot¬ ments of time; his, was the budding promises of future usefulness, intoxica¬ ting his whole being : he saw himself, the protector, the guardian of Isabel ; he met her lucid eye-beam ; he hailed her smile of angel beautj r ; he forgot De Maudit ; he forgot the decease of his be¬ nefactor ; he forgot, that at best, life is illusion, and happiness, a mere phantom, beckoning and eluding pursuit ! He stood at the casement, his eyes turned upon the heavens, and apparent¬ ly watching, though without conscious¬ ness, the dense volumes of clouds, roll¬ ing over the disk of the moon : the glo¬ ries of sunset were lost in the shades of night : the wind sighed in the surround¬ ing foliage, and save the wind, nought else was stirring. Again and again, did he linger over the occurrences of the evening; the strange wish of the baron, to immolate the worldly hopes of Isabel, and the more strange courage of Isabel otí to
to resist those hopes, giving food to re¬ flection and to wonder. Now, all of cheerfulness, all of gay anticipation, va¬ nished ; he saw himself as he really was, unknown, unconnected, unclaimed, with¬ out name, without heritage; born with every ardour of soul, yet that soul, from cold and imperious principle, cast back upon itself; he beheld Isabel, shrouded in the novice-veil ;—he beheld the no¬ vice-veil, darkening into the veil of pro¬ fession ; he heard the half-breathed vow ; he heard the solemn requiem, chanting the knell of living death—Isabel was passing away—Isabel, in all the bloom of youth, in all the beauty of innocence, in all the witchery of attraction, was lost to the world—lost to happiness— lost to himself ! To himself! His start was palsied; it was, as the start of one, awakening, and finding himself on the brink of an abyss ; of one, borne on the light pinion of dreaming fancy, then plunged headlong into utter gloom. He
He glanced around ; he smiled at his own wayward fancier " Alas!" he mused, " what more than friend, can Isabel be to me ? She calls me brother, and still, a strange repining spirit, makes me other than content. Time has been, when such was the dis¬ tinction I most craved; when------" He ceased, for he heard a footstep in the passage ; tiie latch of his door was softly lifted, and the next moment revealed the intruder, but the recognisance of the intruder was lost in the indistinct gloom. " It is I—only I, master Hubert, come, forsooth, on a strange wild errand, and choosing the hour, best fitted, to the bats, and to the owls !" "Geoffry!" exclaimed Hubert, spring¬ ing to his side, and grasping his extend¬ ed hand. " Aye, Geoffry ; or rather, the ghost of the once happy Geoffry ; for how can I be other, than a poor, weeping, wailing ghost,
ghost, when such a mort of woe has fallen upon our house ?" " True, my old friend, w r e are other nian we were; some mulcting—ah ar- flicted." Geoffry dashed away the tear which trembled in his eye ; he carefully reclosed the door, then sinking on the near¬ est settle, " Afflicted ; God wot !" he fal¬ tered out ; " afflicted ; aye, and by hu¬ man hands too : but sure as death—·sure, as this life leads to a better, William is William still ! They talk of honeyed poison : the poison be of this world ; the honey alone of heaven : for never could Heaven mar the portraiture of its ovvn perfection ; and William, had the kind¬ est nature, and the bravest heart ! Oh no, no, William must be William still ! If I could but see him—if I could but stretch myself at his feet—he would no more trample on my grey hairs, no more spurn my withered frame, than I would spurn the consecrated wafer !" " I
" I fear," observed Hubert, " William acts under a false medium, or u charm¬ ed fancy." The old man crossed himself. There was horror in the bare supposition : for in those days of mental bondage, charms, that is, witchcraft and sorcery, vvere the adjudged weapons, with which the devil entrapped souls.—" I hope not so—I pray not so," he pronounced. " If I thought so, barefooted and bareheaded, my loins begirt with a pen an ce- gird le, and a hair-cloth cast around my naked body, I would wander throughout the whole world, to Palestine, to Jerusalem, to tbe city of the living God ;—aye, and I would toil the steep of Mount Cal¬ vary, to seek out, on the blessed spot of sufferance, one relic of the true cross, wherewith he might be healed." " We may seek, and we may find, with¬ out such martyrdom of body /'said H u bert: " for St. Су rill tells us, the whole world is filled with pieces of Christ's cross; yet we
we learn of St. Paulinus, by constant miracle, it is never diminisheel !" " I would we could possess, the small¬ est nail, the smallest splinter/ 5 exclaim¬ ed the enthusiastic Geoffry ; " it would heal tbe leprosy of sin : and like as our Lord, in the country of the Gaderenes, expelled the legion of devils—it would expel the devil out of the heart of Wil¬ liam !" Hubert's reason wrestled with fanati¬ cism ; it told him, more than a mere re¬ lic was wanting to the conversion of his misguided friend ; that human means, human agency, might produce, wliat blind zeal could never accomplish. Y"et he struggled against the pure light of truth, dawning, and flickering, and la¬ bouring to refute the doctrines of the spiritual fathers; he struggled against his own discursive powers : fettered in the iron links of priestcraft and supersti¬ tion, he tried to believe, that faith was the sole passport to heaven, was the ab¬ solving
solving medium, wherewith man might hope salvation :—not like the Pharisees, to use the words of an ancient author— ihe master tetts in the arts of mischief* fellows of such a perfect and concocted mal ice y that ihey were almost able to pos¬ sess the devil ; wearing broader phylac¬ teries, upon their heads, and upon their hands : separating from the rest of man¬ kind, in the boast of stricter sanctity, and resting on the sole merít of their ovvn deeds :—but humbly, meekly, sup¬ plicating grace, wherevv ith to stem ought of schism ; w herewith, to anchor his hopes and his rebanee, on the received ami credited traditions of hierarchical zeal " Our prayers may aid him/'said Hu¬ bert, thoughtfully : " at matins, lauds, vespers, and nocturna, we must ponder on his thraldom, and supplicate his re¬ lease." " I am but a simu i\ like unto himself," observed Geoffry, " eise had my prayers been
been heard, and my atonements accepted. The saints can bear me witness, since the hour of his awful abandonment, 1 have humbled myself before the cross, and supplicated grace upon his trans¬ gressions; with mourning persevering earnestness, have prayed to see him re¬ stored to us, even in death : for the af¬ flictions wherewith the Almighty ehas- teneth and bringeth home his llock, are as drops of the precious balm of the zá¬ ron- 1 ree (a), compared to the afflictions imposed by guilt." A long, long pause ensued ; the moon¬ beams chequered Mie chamber, and the si¬ lence was as the silence of the grave : Hu¬ bert sat with his hand pressed upon his forehead, and his face half bent upon his breast; he was communing with himself; he wab pondering on the dark intricacies of De Maudiťs actions, and wondering, how best, to seek, and awaken in him, the true knowledge of his deeds : he marked not the movements, or the varying fea¬ tures
tures of Geoffry ; nor, till he felt his arm energetically clasped, did he recall his presence: he looked up : the aged man stood beside hirn, his bald head unco¬ vered, his thin and scattered locks, shb ning like threads of silver, and scarce wdiiter than the death-van hue of his cheek. Hubert's heart's-blood curdled; he felt it, as a call, impressive and holy ; he hailed him, as a being, tottering on eternity, yet lingering and clinging to the cares of earth. " What would you?" he whispered. " I vvould have counsel and consulta¬ tion,*' replied Geoffry. " The medita¬ tions of many miserable restless nights, bring me here. I would labour to re- store the wrecked peace of this house — I woukl bind the broken spirit of my lord the baron, and heal the blighted ho¬ nour of his heir." " The work must be of Heaven," said Hubert. iP Yet even here, on earth, may some¬ thing
thing be essayed," rejoined Geoflry ; " nought is impossible, and the zeal of faithful servitude may be repaid." " Ås how?" questioned Hubert, emu¬ lous, in the cause of gratitude, to prove his entire devotion. " Had William left the slightest clue, wherewith to steer by ; could we even guess the banner beneath which he ranges, we might seek him out, in spite of all the force disloyalty can muster/' Geoffry breathed a heavy sigh, then suddenly raising his aged head, and sha¬ king back his grizzled locks, " Sure, 'tis a ray, betokening grace," he exclaimed. " Listen to me, dear youth. I am old, and little fashioned for enterprise, yet will I seek this lost one myself: I will journey to the castle of my lord Fulk tie Pagenel, and there, perchance, I may glean some matter." " You, good Geoffry ! Alack ! feeble is strength, when compared with reso- lution." "Be
" Be it nought, save the threadbare remnant of strength," feelingly respond¬ ed Geoffry, " yet will I devote it to the benefactor of my days of power. Know you not, like the flame, burning and blazing in the very socket, gratitude kindles in the human heart, as long as the human heart be capable of sensation?" " I do know it—I do feel it," said Hubert, eagerly. " But the human heart must not spur beyond the limit of human strength'; remember, winter stays the ripple of every brook which bubbles ! I, dearest Geoffry, now in the full summer of my manhood, am fitter fashioned to the peril. To-morrow, ere sunrise, I will journey to Newport-Pag¬ nel myself. ' Geoffry stood for many moments, si¬ lent and thoughtful, then grasping the arm of the youth, " Not so," he exclaim¬ ed ; " success must not be hazarded by rashness and inadvertence. Once known, once recognised, your very shadow guess¬ ed
ed at as the early compeer of De Mau¬ dit, caution, vvould seal the lips, and chain the tongue, of every member of the household. The distance is nought to one whom zeal maketh light of foot. As a wandering, broken down mendicant —God prosper the subterfuge ! I will hie with the lark from Hanslape, and stretch¬ ing me beside the portal of De Patene!» crave the largess of alms, and a nighťs lodging." " Think you, the green sapling be more known than the oak?" asked Hu¬ bert ; " think you, the standard growth of half a century, be less marked, than the shrub, biding beneath its shadow?" " I think," returned Geoffry, catching the metaphor, " the bud of promise, bright in tint and in hue, is seen, is noted, amid the common hedge-row livery. Age and dependence lacketh little for obscurity—I may advance boldly within the halls of our enemies; thou mayest not tread upon the thresh- old."
old." Again a pause ensued—Hubert craved all of exertion to himself, vet he knew not how to silence the truths of his aged companion. " It must be so," at length resumed Geoffry. " Bedecked in the rags of mendicity, with an empty scrip, and a worn-down staff, I will bear William in my heart, and dare all the taunts, and all the jests, insolence and pride may offer: aye"—-and a beamy smile savoured the afterthought of se¬ curity—" and I will limp in my gait— and í will betoken the total loss of hearing—and perchance, with God's grace, reap a largess, w T cll worth the gathering Г' Quick equipped for the exploit, and panting to expunge the foul blot upon the honour of Hanslape, ere yet morning , " Dappled the <iľon>v γ.,μ unii spijK of ijn-y," the aged * Geoffry, passing by a back postern into the park, and brushing the pendent dew-drops, bent his eager steps to
to the nigh town of Newport-Pagnel. But though zeal, and aching interest, living in his breast, imparted energy to action ; though every step bore him on the mission of duty, still the frost of many winters doubled the toil of the journey : the morasses were deeper ; the hills, steeper; the brakes, thicker, and more impervious. Many a sigh did he heave to the remembered strength of his youth, and when the castle walls, in one huge and ponderous mass, grew out of the haze of distance; when his eyes measured the giant outline, and his thoughts dw r elt upon the black and gar¬ bled complottings, gendering and ripen¬ ing to fruition, he felt his spirit quail— he needed all the rest he was about to crave for. In those times of peril, when doubt harboured every breast, and conscious subterfuge gave colour to eaeli passing casualty ; when suspicion, doubling the watch, thickened the bars of caution, it required
required more than a mere appeal for charity, to pierce the interior of a fast¬ ness: yet did the look, the language, the pleadings of Geoffry, find favour in the eyes of the warder; and without enumerating, the rattle of the chain, and the lowering of the drawbridge; with¬ out striving to delineate the mingled feelings of exultation and disgust, which quickened his every pulse, and bleached his every feature, proceed we, in few words, to take our station in the hall of the lord Fulk de Pagenel, to sit beneath the salt (b) with the aged Geoffry, and to note the light banter of the servitors. Crediting the feint of affected infirmity, nought of reserve stole on the party ; the jest and the wassail-bowl passed round, and the hall rang with shouts and peals of laughter. Many a tale gathered; many an exploit was recounted : it was the epitome of the chieftain's pastime;— the minstrel sang the deeds of heroes, Mid the seer gave words to tbe dreams VOL. III. E Of
of high-wrought fancy. Geoffry, in outward seeming, sat deaf and dead to all ; yet his eye noted every countenance, and his ear drank every sound. " Wist ye," said the seneschal, " that the lord Henry de Montford returns with to-morrow's midnight ?" " Aye, and a main train with him," exclaimed the warder, " Murrain take the varlets, I would as lieve hail Beel¬ zebub and his host." " Belike, they may play Beelzebub among us," observed an attendant lackey, " And leave us to pay the reckoning," rejoined the warder. " God's grace ! and I pray we pass through the furnace, without singeing and burning." " Thou art a fainthearted knave, at best," remarked the seneschal " What singeing and burning need we fear ? The strength of the land is on our side, and the blessing of the church gladdens our darings." " And the eestus of Venus begirts our
our enterprise!" exultingly pronounced a retainer. " Beshrew me, but there lurks more than a host, in the smile of the lady Ingelriea Fitzparnel !" " Thou, Walter, art little better than a lunatic," answered the warder, " for thou art always raving of love and beauty." " Marry," said Walter, " 'tis man's best conceit: carp not at the seeming, for the toil is surer than wealth or power—glory may entrap the fancy, but woman ensnares the soul! What wage ye, that the love of the lady In¬ gelriea, rather than the heroism of the calling, ensnares the services of sir Wil¬ liam de Maudit?" " Love, forsooth !" retorted the war¬ der; " as well may ye seek roses among thistles, and figs among thorns. The lady Ingelriea lends her smile, but her heart floats in ice !" " I would give the residue of my life to thaw the ice," fervently pronounced £ 2 Walter,
Walter, " nor judge the bliss too dearly purchased." " Thou art a mooncalf," said the war¬ der; " thou mayest as well hang thy hopes upon ow* of the stars of heaven. What, the lady Ingelriea bestow a look upon the worm in the mire ! Boy, thy wits are distraught;" and he laughed out¬ right " And thine," muttered Walter, "art steeped in gall and verjuice," and then he turned to the steward of the house¬ hold, and questioned of the nobles ex¬ pected at the castle. " As well mayest thou question of the last moon," said the steward. " My lord moves in mystery, and all the fe¬ derate nobles woo night-shade as a cover¬ ing. Perchance they may drop in, one, two, three, alone ; perchance in coveys." " Will chance bring hither the heir of the baron of Hanslape?" questionea Walter ; " or will the dalliance of passion hold bim in bondage ?" Geoffry
Geoffry bent forward—he listened— he scarcely breathed. " Sir William de Maudit moves but in the orbit of the ladj r Ingelriea Fitz¬ parnel," responded the seneschal ; " and the lady Ingelriea Fitzparnel, holds her revels in the palace of her princely guar¬ dian." ťť At Durham House?" demanded Walter ; " or at Leicester ? or, at the castles of Dunnington or Emildon? or------" " No, no, at the castle of Kenilworth," interrupted the steward: "the royal Elenor, at variance with the king her brother, aids in the furtherance of her husband's schemes." " There will be rare maskings and mum- mings!" said Walter, after a thoughtful pause—" I would I could steal hence, and join the throng !" " What, and add one more fool to the cargo?" growled the warder. " Mar- E $ ryì
ry í thou hadst better tarry a bidding, for there are knaves enow already." The eyes of Walter flashed fire, but the furrowed brows, and grizzled locks of the speaker, cooled his ire ; yet was the smile, curling his nether lip, of doubtful meaning, as jocosely he re¬ marked: " Old men may brawl with impunity, because youth must sacrifice anger to impotence." The dinning laugh, resounding on every side, checked all of retort : and Geoffry, without betraying ought of association, hung his head, as though, by infirmity, he was mournfully ex¬ cluded from all mirth and conviviality : yet—heedless of the compassion he elicited, his eyes half closed, his arms folded upon his tattered gabardine—did his tattered gabardine, cover a heart, throbbing with pleasurable sensations; he had reaped the coveted harvest of his labour; he held the clue, to the spot,
spot, to the cause of De Maudiťs wan- elerings. " We will seek him, even in the halls of Kenilworth," he mused ; " even in the presence of the proud beauty, who wages against his honour, clouds his prospects, and hoodwinks his judgment; we will humble ourselves in bleeding conscious¬ ness; we will pray God, to bless with grace and favour, our humble efforts to wipe away the mildew of guilt, and restore the poor delinquent to happiness and to home ! Ah !" and his hands were clasped in energy and feeling, and his tears stole swiftly down his cheeks— " and we will pray God, to strengthen the weakness of the flesh, to uphold the backslidings of youth, to heal the dread leprosy of sin ; we will pray God, to put away the open shame, and cloak the tempting lure, in the die of its own garbled deformity : for s more bitter than de^th is the woman, whose heart i ; snares and nets, and her hands bands: e 4 whoso
whoso pleaseth God shall escape from her,' he exclaimed aloud, in all the warm zeal of faith, and heedless of those around him ; * but the sinner shall be taken by her."
CHAP-
CHAPTER III.
.-------.----------- , — Oh î foi it vtjice Ot tointuu ' tor a ray uf hopo trom he.iven ! Λ hand, ih α írom гЬеъь tuil »ws of despair, Mav re.u i» tind bii.iti h hım cíe ha чпк eugulph'd. Sou í н fy. The visit of Geoffry to the castle of the lord Fuik de Pagenel was hailed as лп omen of coming good : the plea of a mission of conscience explained away his absence at the several offices of de¬ votion ; and the baron, fully absorbed in his own peculiar sorrows, and tossed betwixt spiritual and temporal concerns, heeded nought beyond. To him, the world seemed as a tangled maze, with scarce one verdant spot upon its sandy surface; he had shrunk from the con¬ verse of men ; he had hemmed himself e 5 within
within the narrow boundary of his own prejudices: and now, that the trump of defiance sounded throughout the land ; now, that the blood-red standard of civil discord was unfurled, he aw r akened, as from a long trance of security, sensitive to all around, yet forgetful, that it was not his fellow men, that it was not the world, which had undergone the trans¬ formation ; but that it was his own mind ? deep steeped in the jaundice of morbid misanthropy. Thus alas ! do years and circumstances vary the computation of things : it is not the things themselves which change, but the medium through which we view them ; in extreme vouth, all is gay, and vivid, and joyous; in puberty, the balance scarce reaches its equipoise ; in age, it falls, dull and stag¬ nant, because the senses become dimmed by the confines of the grave ! He saw, in the duty of Hubert and Isabel, a drop of balm in the bitter cup he quaffed at ; yet did that duty, that devoted and endearing
endearing interest, that zealous study to please and to soften, render the pang of approaching danger more pungent, the threat of local ill more appalling. His mind was the seat of alarm and care ; he pictured himself the carver of his own trials, and he trembled, lest the fearful omissions of the past, should be visited with still heavier judgments in the fu¬ ture: he saw king—country—family— all he loved, confounded in one general overthrow; he traced the black and inky clouds gathering in portentous order ; he felt the archives of his house, maculated in the delinquency of his son ; -—and he looked to another fast of St. Dunstan, as the condemned and hope- lost criminal looks to the dawn of ex¬ ecution. Not so the mind and feelings of Hu¬ bert : he aided in all the fanatic rites of devotion; and when he quitted the cha¬ pel, the evening succeeding the depar¬ ture of Geoffry for Newport-Pagne!, he E 6 took
took his station on the top of the war¬ der's tower, to wait and to watch his return. It was the dizzy summit, from which the infant Henry had been so lucklessly precipitated; and his spirits sank in recalling the long train of evils clouding the then brilliant hopes of his benefactor: yet that day, that fate- fraught day, had given birth to Isabel ; and the known grace, and loveliness, and kindly virtues of Isabel, crowding on the disastrous picture, insensibly di¬ vorced ought of gloom. Love scattered all his blandishments : " like a mist that melts on the sunny hill," Isabel hoveretl around, radiant in youth, rich in all of woman's witchery : he yielded to the fairy imagery ; he wandered amid bright and deathless flowers ; he hailed nought, save bliss; he bosomed nought, save hope : her voice—her tear—her soft and beamy smile; her sports, and her ca¬ resses, in infancy ; her candour, and her confidence, in riper years: quick fd. lowed,
lowed, her struggles against the dread wishes of her father; her touching looks —her far more dangerous reluctance. " Why should she shrink from the veil of profession?" he mused. " Why should she liken it unto death ?" Was it the answer of his own fancy which suffused his cheek with vivid crimson ? —or, was it the remembered glance of her eye, which quickened every pulse at his heart? He bent over the parapet; he looked down upon the spot, once stained with the blood of Henry ; yet so wrapt was he in the bewildering tissue of illusion, so buoyant were his thoughts and his feelings, that insensible to sorrows armed against the inroads of ought like gloom, as Campbell's Ger¬ trude, his eyes " Seeniul ю love ail that they looked upon." The slow advance of old Geoflry, toiling the upland, severed the silvered chord; it brought him back to reality; tt re¬ called
talled all of anxiety and care: the pale face of the baron, chased the cherub form of Isabel; and the brother of Isabel, rose paramount to all. He de= scended the tower ; he crossed the draw¬ bridge; and " Swifter lhan arrow from the Tartar's bow,'* bounded over the greensward, and reached the side of Geoffry. " God keep thee, dear youth !" said the aged man. " I have laboured, but I have reaped a gathering." " De Maudit," asked Hubert—" so¬ journs De Maudit at Newport-Pagnel ?" " I cry patience," resumed Geoffry. " Young blood is hot and hasty. I said not De Maudit was at Newport-Pagnel —-I did but mean, I had ferreted out the glimpse of his retreat." " Is that all ?" and Hubert's sigh be¬ trayed the disappointment within. " No, not all ; not quite all, either," pursued Geoffry ; " for I know the thorn which
which rankles; I guess the festering blain, which corrupts his healthful vir¬ tues. Woman, dearest Hubert, woman is the poison : know you not"—and he spoke with mournful fervour—" woman is the bliss or the cursé of man ?—know you not, that she shines as a bright meteor in his stormy atmosphere, or steeps his path in hellebore and rue?" " I have heard so—I do believe so," said Hubert, thoughtfully : " but that woman, cannot be as Isabel; that wo¬ man, cannot be fashioned in the like mould." " Not her heart—truly, not her heart," responded Geoffry : " the heart is hid in many folds; and the nature is hid, and the disposition is hid, when love hoodwinks the judgment Belike he thinks her all angel, because she is fair to look upon ;—fair, forsooth ! aye, as the apples of Sodom, dappled and tempt¬ ing, but full of dust and ashes. Yet it can be but a moonshine passion after all, for
for they speak slightingly of the maiden." And then he recounted what had passed ; his fatigues, his difficulty of access, and all he had gleaned from the conversation of the servitors. " They believed all my furbished tale," pursued Geoffry; " how that I was deaf, and bent wellnigh to the grave, with pain and penury : and when I gave words to my own thoughts, and broke forth with more feeling than policy, they wondered at my wild con¬ ceits, and shrugged, and smiled, and pitied the wits which age had addled. Well, I told them a story, of a far land, and of home sorrows ; and without so much as craving a dole, they filled my scrip with broken fragments, bestowed these farthings"—producing the coin— " to purehase a meal and a lodging, and speeded me with a God's blessing on my journey !" " At Kenilworth," said Hubert, mu¬ sing. " Said they not, Leicester's coun- tes«,
tess, and the lady Ingeirica, sojourned at Ken il worth ?* " Surely did they/* replied GeoflPry: " and if—as they will have it—our Wil¬ liam de Maudit, moves but in the orbit of the lady Ingeirica, 'tis at Kenilworth we must seek him." " It is at Kenilworth, we will seek him·— I will seek him," exclaimed Hu¬ bert, hurrying forward ; " at Kenilworth, spite of a d ragon- watch, I will probe his inmost soul: and now, good Geoifiy, let us crave the ear of father Gilbert, and take his ghostly counsel for our guide." The conference was held at the close of the vesper-service, when the baron sought his own oratory, to meditate and to pray : and oft and anon, did the con¬ fessor cross himself, in listening to the dark trammel hemming in his pupil.— " Men call it love," he pronounced ; " rather, be it a mesh of helľs own weaving." « Yet»
" Yet, father," submissively observed Hubert, " does it not bespeak the be¬ wilderment of the judgment, rather than the vitiation of the heart ?~ does it not prove him, the slave of sense, more than the graceless complotter of violence and treason ?" " Still, he leagues with traitors ; he aids their midnight dealings ; he fathers doings, which shun the light. What availeth Це motive, when the act remain the same ţ My son—my son, it is wo¬ man, who brought ruin on the world ; it is womaii, who instigated man to per¬ dition ! I fell thee, Hubert, to leap the pale of vijrtue, is to break upon the confines of vice : for so close is the as¬ sociation, that like unto light and dark¬ ness, we see not the magic boundary— we know not the end of the one, or the commencement of the other." " True, holy sir ; but with God's high favour, may we not glide from darkness back into light? Trace we not in the book
book of life, many backslidings, and many ensamples of repentance and mercy! David, humbled himself to the dust— Naaman, dipping in Jordan, healed his leprosy : nay, in the holy gospels, the prodigal, lost and found, dead and alive, again yields blessed incentive to sor¬ rowing consciousness." " Would it were come to sorrowing consciousness! would it were come to sackcloth and to ashes !" exclaimed father Gilbert ; " then might we greet him with a holy kiss ; then might we bid him cheer; then might we say, in scripture truth, * there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth/ But when conscience is ' seared, as with a hot iron/ what have we to do but mourn ?" ť í More—much more," eagerly replied Hubert; "we must seek him out; we must not lose him for lack of human ef¬ fort. Father, dearest father, speed me With
with a blessing, and I will start for Ke¬ nihvorth this present night." " Thinkest thou," asked the confessor, " my lord the baron will sanction such a venture?—thinkest thou, he will plunge thee into the hottest furnace of treason ?" " I think," said Hubert, earnestly, " my lord the baron, need not, must not know my visit to Kenilworth ; surely, tiiese are worldly circumstances"—and he spoke with energy—" when subter¬ fuge loses *¿b¿ imputation of deceit. Should I fail, why rive his heart with the disclosure?—Should I, with God's aid, bring home the wanderer, will he not kill the fatted calf?" " The wild dream of youth," sighed the confessor; " the will-with-a-wisp, to tangle and mislead." " Perhaps," exultingly rejoined Hu¬ bert " the pharos, to lure from the rushes and sedges, which now tangle and mis¬ lead ! I must think so, father ; and I must seek
seek our poor William, even within the magic circle of the witch who holds him." The monk, crossing himself, muttered a credo; and when he descanted on the sin of presumption ; when he spoke of the evils gendered in self-confidence, of the subtle inroads of passion, and its ma¬ lign influence on tbe souls of men, Hu¬ berts smile was defiance.— "DeMaudit cannot love this Ingelriea, beyond my love fbr Isabel," he mused ; " yet would î sacrifice my love fbr Isabel, to the im¬ perious call of my duty." The love which lived in the heartof Hu- bert, was pure, and deep, and steaely ; was founded on principle and honour; wasthe love of an intellectual mind, established on the firm basis of observation and sympathy : Hke the calm and stilly flame, spiring towards heaven, it was fed from the cruise of religion and holiness ; it was hemmed in by virtue and mode¬ ration ; it was sheltered, as are the high altars of the saints, from the rude and stormy
stormy breath of passion ! To him, the contamination of the world was un¬ known ; in him, the laxity of custom was unguessed at : his love, was as that principle, planted by the hand divine, and glowing in the breasts of our first parents, ere sin gave birth to sorrow : it was genuine and un cloyed : it was pure as the dew of Hermon, and lovely as —- — — ч Π (4,¡4 Л' paradise, Аъ yot untor.eii!'* " Bear in mind," exclaimed father Gil¬ bert, willing to prove the strength and resolution of his pupil, " that every town, and every hamlet, throughout England, teems with the scathing fire of rebellion; that violence owns no law; that rapacity scoffs at justice; that men's minds are poisoned, and men's actions, savour of the hell which goads them." " Though my path be crimsoned in the blood of my fellow," said Hubert, em¬ phatically—"though murder cower, and outrage cry aloud, yet will I dare the peril,
peril, in adventure for my friend. I will see him, father—I will bring the warning home to his heart—I will set before him. * life and death, blessino· and J о cursing/ and awaken, with God's grace, the slumbering monitor, conscience." " Lost, and fallen as he is, should he denounce thee to the arch-fiend, Lei¬ cester," asked father Gilbert : " should he-—" The start, the shudder of Hubert, was palsied.—" Virgin Mother !" he apostrophized, then quick recovering himself, " His blood," he pursued, " can¬ not be turned to gall—his heart, cannot be turned to marble." " It is not for me or thee to limit the darings of depravity," rejoined the con lessor : " De Maudit is the sport of some demon warring with mankind : as he is —not as he has been —must we read him/ " Still will I seek him with confidence hi my own safety/' firmly pronounced Hubert ; " for as lieve would he harm the toothless
toothless suckling, as the brother of his days of innocence. Dear father, it is thy aid I vvould crave : think of the poor Wil¬ liam, sinking, drowning, in the rank stream of corruption, and stretch forth thine hand to succour." " As how ?" questioned the confessor, anxiously gazing towards him. " By aiding in my pass from Hans¬ lape to Kenilworth," replied Hubert, " and garbing the cause of my absence, in ought, save its real colour. The device must be pardonable, for I would but spare the feelings of my benefactor." The confessor stood, for many mo¬ ments, silent and thoughtful.—" I fear much mischief may arise," he at length observed ; " yet if a mission to the ca* ngm of St. Mary's priory at Kenilworth, can befriend the purpose, thou mayest journey on the pretence." Hubert snatched the hand of the гадок ; he spoke not, but the warm tear, wt$ch fell upem it børe evidence of his feelings.
feelings. The pious zeal, and blind fa¬ naticism of the baron of Hanslape, quick¬ ly tangled him in the holy lure, where- witù ixueiert sougut to reci&im the wan¬ dering William; he listened with a glowing spirit ; he forwarded the devout calling; he bid him, neither slumber or sleep ; and then, reverting to the self- abasement of the past, besought him? ever to bear in mind, the dire mildew, which had blasted the pure stream of his ovvi felici t y. " Never suffer the false colours of the world, to dazzle and beguile from the straight path of duty—of spiritual du¬ ty," solemnly pronounced the baron ; " for the recognisance is deadly. Go, my son : and when within the peaceful sanGtuary of the church ; when tarrying with the pure disciples of the true faith, crave, at the altar of the Holy of holies, the blessed largess of prayer, for an ab¬ sent and a contrite sinner." Long after Hubert had parted from vol. ш. f the
the baron, did his warm and parental be- nison glow on memory ; and longer still, did the kindly smile, and tear-gemmed eyes of Isabel, linger : he bore them with him to the solitude of his chamber ; he treasured th^ ч in the deepest folds oí his heart: her fearful start, her ill sup« pressed regret, had marked the an¬ nouncement of his departure ; and that start, and that regret, lived as the morn ing star of his fancy, cheered him o'er many a lengthened mile of toil and tri - bulation : the change from red to pale, the swollen sigh, the timid sensibility, the tender interest, with w r hich she cau- tioned him of danger ; the fervent pray¬ er she offered up for his return ; her look of embarrassment and feeling — dier words, so sad, and so prophetic — her smile, so sweet—her beauty, so transcen¬ dent—for sure, к ------------Never «as form ьо delicate, Fashion'd ш dream or story, to create Wonder and love m шап-— —·"
floated
floated in golden visions of heart delight¬ ing interest ! The night was given to reflection, ra¬ ther than to sleep, for the past, the pre¬ sent, and the future, alternately drew on his tenderness, his wonder, and his dread, flickering in brilliant reminiscences, or troubled doubts, Oi mournful specula¬ tions. It was to save the partner of his early happiness, that he was about to brave difficulty and danger ; to lure back an estranged and alienated heart, that at dawn of day, he was voluntarily to quit the home of his peace and his wishes, to become a wanderer in a trou¬ bled land, to dare the giant power of a party, hostile to the cause, his princi¬ ples, and his religion, advocated. Once, and only once, did the dark hints of fa¬ ther Gilbert, in the possibility of treach¬ ery, quicken the pang at his heart : chains, and a dungeon, and long and harrowing separation from those he most loved, seemed as the issue of his hardi- F 2 hood ;
hood ; seemed, as the rank gathering of all his zealous friendship; he writhed beneath the threatening death-stroke; beneath a stab, so mortal to the honour of De Maudit. " No, no," he ejaculated, starting from his thorn-planted pillow, and hastily pacing his chamber, " thou canst not be so fallen : even at the instigation of this idol Ingeirica, thou canst not do a deed, so foul and damning. Thou art wrong. father Gilbert"—as though apostrophi¬ zing him—" thou forgettest the feel¬ ings, and the virtues, of our poor Wil¬ liam; they may slumber for a season, but they cannot be quite lost." And asha¬ med of the doubt of a single moment, he bowed his head in self-arraignment, nor chased the tears which trembled in his eyes. Hollow gusts of wind had succeeded the serenity of the past evening : the sun had set in glory ; but the glory- like unto the world's smiles—had yield¬ ed
ed to fitfulness and storm: the moon, climbing the heavens, and mantled in all her brightness, shed her silver tissue on hill and woodland ; yet was her bright¬ ness brief; for dark and dense clouds, drifting, and blending, now intercepted, and now obscured. Hubert clasped his hands ; he groaned in the poignancy of his feelings : it was an epitome, of the vague, shadowy, and uncertain splen¬ dour of all things earthly ;—it brought with it, the image of William—of his once cloudless promises—of his now wa¬ ning honour. A huge and awful mass of " congregated vapours," gathering in thick folds, and ranging in fantastic and portentous order, scudded on the wings of the wind ; they advanced; they broke upon the halo of the moons glory ; she wrestled ; she struggled for mastery ; she dipped ; she emerged ; she burst forth ; and then she disappeared, and earth antl sky became enwrapped in one universal shadow ' " De Maudit ! De Maudit !" f 3 ejaculated
ejaculated Hubert, " alike subdued! alike darkened !" The similitude quenched the very spirit of hope, ι ^ he read in the type, the annihilation of his friend : foreboding doubts, nameless terrors, crowded on imagination ; his limbs shook; his fore¬ head became cold and damp, as though scattered with the dews of the grave ; his breast heaved ; he laboured with an oppressive woe, for the mortal, as the immortal, were alike under the dominion of powerful and superstitious torment. " Father omnipotent!" he aspirated. " God of compassion and mercy, arrest thy judgments! vouchsafe thy clemency, even to the enormity of his guilt ! Melt the marble of his heart! wound him* and save him ! pierce him to the centre; stricken him, yet stretch forth thy arm to heal!" His knees were bent—his hands were clasped—his eyes vvere fixed upon the heavens. At that instant—at that prophetic in¬ stant,
stant, the moon, bursting from her muf¬ fling shroud, and clearing every haze, rode in a sky, so pure, so blue, that you might tell each little star, and read it, as the earnest of a dawn of lavour. Hu¬ berts spirit joyed in the mystic imagery ; his eyes flooded in tears of thankfulness ; it was transport, it was gratitude, which binding up his fainting faith, and rally¬ ing every impulse of his nature, long chained him in prayer and mental invo¬ cation. Hope, and bliss, and expectation, sprung like the phcenix, from their own ashes : he felt that despair was the cow¬ ard s virtue; that exertion, reliance, and faith, was the Christian's boon. " Father! Father!" he empirically pronounced, ** temper me to this vale of tears ; fashion me to thy laws ; teach me unerring obedience—and give me the grace, to serve and to fear thee !"
ì i СНАГ-
CHAPTER IV.
The spirit oťthe tíme shall teach me bpeed. SUAKtSPElKb. 'T« the most peerless pitee of earth, That e'er the sun shone bright on ! Hid, The cold and searching chill of morning, breaking amid mist and dew, gleamed faintly on the rough and beatened track, yet Hubert, anxious and eager, passed the boundary of the park, nor paused, till on the utmost verge of his early haunts; then, checking the spe^d of his horse, he turned, to snatch one more glimpse, to yield to feeling, the sweet and bitter grant of brief indulgence. Wreaths of onst, clinging to the trees, still thickened the haze of distance ; yet the village, and the village church, the castle, and the little chapel, catching the first
first beams of the rising sun, grew and swelled into magnitude. Every spray hung pendent with the tear-drops of night; every blossom glowed in reno¬ vated beauty : the breeze rifled the sweetest odours ; and the lark, " morn's harbinger," soaring in mid-air, earolleel the matin of his praise ! It was a scene, to elicit gratitude and thankfulness; to trance the wrapt soul, and elevate it beyond the confines of earth : but Hu¬ bert's soul, Hubert's fancy, clung to a lighter, vainer contemplation ; it was the hopes, and fears, and doubts, and per¬ plexities of earth, which held him in bondage; it was the tremors, and wishes, and sensitive inconsistencies of human infirmity, which left him nought, save eyes, wherewith to view the prospect. That mora—that very morn, had the baron clasped him in a warm embrace; —had father Gilbert counselled him to action ;—had Isabel dropped a tear, as she wrang his hand in adieu; her fair f 5 face,
face, bowing like the surcharged lily; her cheeks, her temples, tinted with the glow of diffidence ; her voice, dying into sobs, as softly she whispered—" Be wary, Hubert, lest I lose both my brothers." Geoffry too, had crossed the draw¬ bridge, to follow, with his blessings, and his prayers; to supplicate, for better times, and brighter seasons. It was a confused, a transporting, a seduc¬ tive bewilderment, of love, friendship, mterest, and respect, which mingled, and flooded his eyes, now, with tears of pleasure, and now with tears of mourn¬ ing : William, for a brief moment, was forgotten ; the spur of absence, the ne¬ cessity for exertion, alike yielded to the betraying softness of the heart : clouds and sunshine lived in his eyes ; now, the Äectic of strong emotion, passing over his cheek; now fading, like fitful light¬ ning, rending an ebon sky ! Isabel was the charm to chase discomfort ; her look of love; her accent of seductive inte¬ rest '
rest ! Be wary> Hubert, lest I hse both my brothers, was a potent spell, soft as the chant of angels, and replete with all that magic, which gilds, and brightens youth's earliest anticipations " Ah,, that I could bring back both thy brothers !" he articulated, and again De Maudit arose, and wi¿h him, the mighty train of ills and evils, crowding on anarchy and treason. The firebrand of discord, scathing the green fields, and smiling pastures of his country; the reeking sword, crimsoned in the blood of his countrymen ! England, despoiled and desolate; her honour blasted; her beauty defaced; her plenty, turned to barrenness ! The picture curdled the vital spring of patriotism ; it gave spur to horse, as though his presence could check the gathering ruin; and when again he paused, every haunt of his childhood was lost in distance ; the very hills mingling with the horizon; the trees, and the f 6 knolls,
knolls, and the knotted outlines, indis¬ tinct and gone. Although outrage lives where law- ceases to be iionoured ; although \iolence and turpitude ever mark the astounding lapse of public ordinance, Hubert »nd his solitary follower, passed through the troubled scenes of future turmoil, with¬ out ought of adventure, without ought of note, chequering the maze he thread- fed. The morass, and the darkening forest; the bleak heath, and barren moor, offered but feeble barriers to his hardi¬ hood : it was to serve his benefactor—it was to bring back a stray sheep to the fold—it was to plant smiles on the beau¬ teous brow of Isabel—and " the purple light of love," shone o'er all liis under¬ takings. At Weedon-Pinkney, on the w r est of Toweester, he rested in the Bene¬ dictine priory of St. Mary : at Da ven try, with the black monks of ht. Austin : at Coventry* in the eat ht dral priory, founded
founded by Leofric, and his lady, Go- diva, and dedicated to the Virgin Mary, St. Peter* and St. Osburgh : from thence, speeded with blessings and prayers, he proceeded onwards to Kenilworth : and the sun had long set, and the night shades were fast gathering, when he hailed the darkening pile of St. Mar¬ garet, rearing its gaunt walls, and gloam¬ ing, like promised land, in the distance. His thoughts, and his feelings, were depressed; fbr ч _-----_>„_.------ _ _'l f je dy U) a day, Buf represents the шаг approaching du »m Of aii tiniig^ Ľurtlily j" and the chase, and the park, the towers, the cumbrous walls, and giant battle¬ ments of Kenilworth castle, contrasted, but a gorgeous pageant, to the grey and unobtrusive pile of holiness. Dropping the reins upon his horses neck, he measured, with his eyes, the princely domain of the proud Leicester: armed and fortified, frowning in gran¬ deur
deur and awful beauty, it stood, the crying monument, of a sovereign's mu¬ nificence, and a subject's ingratitude; for passing, as a dower with the princess Elenor—although the grant of the royal Henry—it was now become the hotbed of treason, and the strong hold of re¬ bellion. It was there too, that "William nursed the mad spirit of nonconformity ; that tangled in the serpent-coil of plea¬ sure, and imbibing all the heresies of disobedience and revolt, he yielded his strength and his powers to the hostile cause; there too, that voluntarily sacri¬ ficing truth and honour, he immolated all the kindlj r virtues of his nature, trampling down the laws of duty, and blasting every germ of early promise. A sickening chill iced the lifeblood of Hubert; his energy, his spirit, felt to droop within him: his was а nature, to love long, to love ardently, to love, once, and for ever; and death-fraught was the axe, which aimed at the root, of that
tried, and dear, and cherished love: he recalled the obduracy of De Maudit; tbe vain and ineffectual efforts, with which he had assailed his heart and reason ; the prayers, the importunities, the tears he had shed at his feet; the wild and energetic calls he had made upon his feelings and his interest :—alas! those prayers, those importunities, had been breathed to the wind ; those tears had been spent, like rain-drops in the ocean; those wild and energetic calls, had passed away, unheeded and rejeeted ; his warnings had been vain ; his agony despised ; his supplications scoffed at : he had struggled, but his struggles were as though wrestling with fate—William was as one possessed, and now he sought him in the very circlet of suspected witchery. " All may yet be well" sighed Hu¬ bert, ki if he will but aid in the labour of his own freedom ;" little dreaming, that the fetters of Cupid^—though cased in
in roses — are as links of steel ; little dreaming, that the stru »gles of one, en¬ slaved and toiled, are as ineffectual, as were the struggles of Laocoon, in tlie coils of the monstrous Python. The sullen sound of the convent bell, and the drowsy vesper-hymn, floating on the gale, aroused Hubert from his melancholy musing: with inward shud- derings, he turned from the towers of Kenilworth, nor again paused, till with¬ in the court-yard of St. Margaret's; there, greeted by the pious canons with hos¬ pitality and good-will—for throughout England, religious houses gave honour¬ able reception to wanderers and way¬ farers—he tried to banish every ill, to woo forgetfulness in the blank of slum¬ ber. But sleep heedeth not the beck of burdened minds and oppressed spirits ; sleep, blessing the blessed, " lights on lids unsullied with a tear :" he saw the moon arise ; he watched her " walking in her vestal glory ;" he saw myriads of stars,
stars, twinkling in the blue expanse ; he prayed for William—for his country— for the baron—for Isabel; and Isabel, beamed as a vision of light, but Isabel brought not peace to his perturbed spirits : all on this earth, was blank and rayless, beset with difficulties, with dan· gers, with perplexities ; each pass, scat¬ tered with thorns ; each aspect, wearing but the dingy colouring of desolation. If for a moment, the eye ceased to watch, and the mind to conjure, like one, tottering on a shelving brink, and vainly catching at twigs and rushes it was to start, and to awaken ; to find himself at the very base of the preci¬ pice, and to shudder at the fevered phantasy which usurped the sway of reason. The night was long and cheer¬ less ; the hours, proîengthened, stretched, as it were, beyond their narrow limit, and tortured by the hydra misgivings of moody thought: with more than thankfulness, he hailed the gradual burst of
of returning day, and marked the flaky tints of burnished gold, fringing the saffron haze of morning : the chirp of the birds, and the low chime of the matin bell, tokened the landings of praise: to the call of early devotion, quick followed the measured tread of the holy brethren, seeking the footstool of tbe Eternal; and next, the choral chant, resounding from the organ-loft. Bent on a pursuit, which gratitude to his benefactor stamped imperative, from the chapel, Hubert snatched the early meal of morning, and closely shrouding himself in a loose cloak, quitted the monastery, and bent his steps to the domain of the lordly Leicester. He crossed the boundary of the chase, with feelings little fashioned to harmony, yet did the soft swell of hill and dale, the emerald burnish of the woodland, the ethereal blue of the vaulted sky, sleeping twice-told upon the lake's pellucid bo¬ som, the fringy margin, dappled with aqueous
aqueous plants, the blossoms, the shrubs, the thick-set coppice, the stately oaks, and spreading chesnuts, imbued in morn's richest dew-drops, rouse him from the indulgence of his own peculiar musings, and elevate him, mind and spirit, to the mighty Giver of earthly promise ! Tangled in the intricacy of interlacing trees, and shut out from all vestige of the grey towers of Kenilworth, he brushed the pendent dew from the long grass, and journeyed onwards, conning the hard task he had to execute, and pondering how best to probe the heart of the alienated William, Many a flight of fancy did he body ; many a tear, of genuine sensibility, started and dried upon his deeply flushing cheek ; many an essay did he frame and reject ; suc¬ cessively, the sport of fevered hope, and spirit-killing despondence ; now, doubt- tul of his ow n powers ; and now, pining for the moment to rally them into being. Suddenly,
Suddenly, the tinkling of falcon*bells, and the peeling bursts of merriment, spoke the approach of revellers: he paused to catch the direction of sound, anxious to evade a rencontre so dis¬ cordant ; he listened ; he bent forward : the laugh and the jest grew louder: swelling on the gale, the party seemed advancing to the very spot on which he stood : he darted down a mazy pathway; he fled with thoughtless precipitation, and the next instant, emerging from the branches, he found himself on a velvet sward, and facing the very party he sought to distance. One glance, and his pulses quickened, and his heart throbbed almost audibly— De Maudit, not cased in steel, and wielding the sword of de¬ fiance—but De Maudit, habited in a hunting-suit, gorgeously embroidered ; a bugle slung from his rich baldric; and a light plume, playing o'er his health- dappled features—rivetted every im¬ pulse of his being— De Maudit, sur¬ rounded
rounded bj r many " high and mounting spirits," leading an ambling palfrey, on which was seated, a creature of unearthly beauty ; brighter, more dazzling, far more resplendent, than the fabled hou- ries of Mahomet's paradise! decked in a vest of forest-green ; her raven hair, contrasting the snow of her forehead ; and holding, bj r jesses, on a hand, white as the cygnet's bosom, her " tassel- gentel !" The sweet and sportive smile, parting lips of coral, and revealing teeth of polished ivory, as the sun's gracious largess, seemed the disseminator of uni¬ versal joy : each heart, of each individual follower, lived upon that smile, ciung to the fitful beam, as though dispensing all of this world's favour! Hubert too stood entranced; for Hubert had never seen, ought in human mould, so fault¬ less; yet when he marked the eyes of De Maudit, rivetted upon the beamy vision—rivetted, with that expression of devotedness, which speaks the souľs captivity.
captivity, a universal shuddering seized him; he spoke not, but he bent hastily forward; and as he half extended his arms, a heavy moan burst from his bosom; it was deep and searching; it pierced each ear, and it chained each vagrant interest : but De Maudits im¬ pulsive spirit was fled : 'tis true, his cheek from crimson faded to snow, and the reins of the prancing palfrey trem¬ bled in his nerveless grasp ; yet was he, no more, the creature of feeling —no more, the tender sensitive William of his days of innocence ; he looked proud¬ ly, coldly, in the face of' Hubert, then turning to his fair charge, and murmur¬ ing something of apology, motioned to advance. " Not so, sir William/' said the lady Ingelriea. " Perchance, some friend, or follower; and fain"—and her smile and her look were seductive-—" would we enrol, all your friends, and all your followers" Hubert
Hubert heard not the whispered response, but he traetxl the fire of intoxicating passion, flushing in the eyes, and burning on the cheeks of his infatuated friend ; he saw the palpable confusion, the half-cov, half-encouraging bashfuiness, which ever heightens the tints of beauty; the downcast look; " the bosom's fluttering swell;" the nameless, the indescribable fluctuations, felt in the witcherv of woman: imd he, too, started from an absorption of won¬ derment and delight, when the voice of De Maudit pronounced et A messenger from Hanslape/" % * Will he join our spotts?' asked the lady Ingelriea; "or will he tarry our coming at Kenilworth"'*" " Neither, lady," said Hubert, coldly . " my sojourn is with tht» black canons of St. Margaret's." " Marry !" observed a gay galliard, "your age ill fits the calli. tg: prayei and grizzled locks are better suiting/' Hubert'*
120 SIEGE OF KENILWORTH. Hubert's glance was scorn, his smile irony, and he turned in silence from the speaker, and pressing to the side of De Maudit —" My sojourn İs with the black canons of St. Margaret's," he emphatic eally repeated. " Enough," exclaimed De Maudit ; " at the convent-grate will I seek you. But wherefore so thrift of time, when the lady Ingelriea Fitzparnel bids to her service ?" " My mind is ill fashioned to the service of the gay and the happy/' mournfully replied Hubert ; " the pas¬ time of lighter hours yields to weightier matter." William's look was troubled, but it was as a cloud scudding o'er the disk of the sun, for his smile came with the instant, and his whisper planted new roses on the beauteous cheek of his mistress.—" Nay, we canrtot ab¬ solve you from our service," she bsped, turningherbrigbt eyes on the agitai Hubert—
Hubert—" and here is our wish im¬ perative." 6i We would but know you better," said one of the party : '* revel with us the niaxcs oï the forest, and at eventide, we will together tell our beads in the convent-chapel" " I pray— i entreat," urged De Mau¬ dit, and lie moved from the side of Ingeirica, and placed his hand on the arm of Hubert The touch was electric—Hubert's eyes swam ib tears—it was the dream of other da\ s which passed before him ; the bright dream of happiness and unbroken concord—the woods of Hanslape—-the bond of unanimity and love: but it lasted scarce a moment: he saw biniseli the subject of busy speculation; he heard the gathering whisper; he traced the genual smile, and he started back into himself.—" My sojourn is with the black canons of St. Margaret's," he a third th it* repeated, then bowing grace- voi :il a fully
f tilly to the lady Ingelriea, and drawing liis cloak close around him, he sprang into the thicket, and fled from ought of further importunity.
CHAP-
CHAPTER V.
~~*. — ------Afthnfmn may subdue the cheek, Hut not take m the mind. Shakespeare, ------Our country -¡inks beneatii tiie yoke; it vveepb, it bleedt» ; and eacli new dity u trash 1- added to iter wound». f bid The portal of Hanslape had but newly closed on Hubert, when the heavy blank, and dead silence, produced by his absence, gave place to expectancy and conjecture. The baron had retired, to ponder o'er the elaborate pages of the spiritual fathers, anel to seek fortitude and strength in the ensample of scripture truths—Isabel was toiling at her loom; her fingers scattering flowers, although lier eyes were dim, and her thoughts wan¬ dering; now, chiding her day-dreams, cheeking the reins of fertile fancy, and rallying back to order, but to smile at a g 2 blue
blue rose, and marvel at the random produce of a yellow pink. " Pshaw ! pshaw ! sura my wits are distraught ! I can weave nought to-day, nor touch my virginal, nor sing my nursery ballads;"—and dissatisfied and fretful, she east aside her needle, and walked to the casement. The day ψ was, as the morn had au¬ gured, cloudless and resplendent ! * ť Every g.iie pence, and eveiy цпле melody ;" yet, did " the sight of nature in her glorious mood," lose her accustomed influence : the scenes on which her de¬ lighted fancy had often dwelt, the remembrances which had pierced even to the cloistered aisles of St. Mary's, ceased to allure and to charm : mecha¬ nically did her eyes wander o'er the still trance of summer beauty; vague, gloomy, spiritless, resting as though on vacancy, and lost to all, save the thrill¬ ing contrast of the past. It was Williams chasing
chasing her through the long grass ;—it was Hubert, shielding her from the rougher sports of William ;—-it was her father, smiling on the struggles of the rival boys, and raising her above their reach into the sanctuary of his own em¬ brace ! A sigh, a startling sigh, to the ghost of past pleasure, heaved the lawn on her bosom ; and " light as the blast, and moving like the shadow of mist," the fairy phantasy vanished ; nought but the abandonment of William re¬ mained ; nought, save the desolation of her father's hopes : it was a tangled woof, and vainly did she strive, to resolve the strange desertion, the unnatural aliena- tion —Ingelriea, was as Gloucester to the fugitive Margaret; the fell fiend; the black and morbid blast upon the horizon of peace and honour. Suddenly, she saw more than the tall trees and the green sward, more than the blue smoke spiring towards heaven ; she saw a dark and moving mass ; and, g 3 as
as the distance lessened, she saw a group of horsemen, rapidly advancing towards the castle. Time had been, when such an appearance had awakened nought save hospitable greetings ; when the voice of welcome had stayed the way¬ farer, and the board and the wassail-cup, had lured him to repose : now, a cold chill lay at her heart, a universal tre- mour curdled the genial benevolence of her nature ; she knew not what evil lurked beneath the threatened innova¬ tion: the troubled aspect of the times warranted suspicion ; and she had read, in many a legendary tale, how that the adder often cowered amid the brightest flowers. Dun coloured cloaks, and slouched bonnets, was as the livery ot the party : they advanced at a steady trot : and the white pennon, streaming from a lance, and waving to-and-fro. bore, as the dove, the symbol of the olive branch : quick followed the clamor¬ ous blast of a bugle, and almost in the same
same hreath, the signal-horn sounded from the warder's tower. The tread ot' feet succeeded the buzz of voices ; every post was manned ; and all of confusion, subsiding into order, the drawbridge was lowered, and the strangers admitted within the court-yard. Was it a dream / —was it the mere deception of vision J —or, was it her father, that fell into the elder stranger's arms^—and that her shriek, and only her shriek, could rally into animation ? Isabel did shriek, ami every eye was turned upon the case¬ ment; she believed her father stricken with mortal ailment, and her lamenta¬ tions, and her cries of woo» witnessed tht pangs of her despair. With cheeks, л , wan as the shrouded dead, with hair dishevelled, and with looks wild and frenzied, she qtiitted her chamber, threaded the long passages, and rushed into the court-yard: but despair chan¬ ged into gladness, lamentation into joy it was her father, well; it was sir Roger g ť Mortimer.
Mortimer, the friend of her father's youth, who now chased her terrors, and turned her tears into ç miles. Much time elapsed, ere more than wonder, and frequent and wild ejacula¬ tions on the part of the baron, marked the conference : his thoughts were snatched back to scenes and incidents which years had wellnigh buried—to the period marking his vwv —to the fatal ne¬ glect of his vow—to the Temple church —to the Templar's dire adjuration and such was the jaundice of ins misanthro» phy, that each succeeding ill towered o'er each succeeding blessing. Bursts of tears, and frequent invocations for grace, noted the bleeding еопч-нньиечч of tht spirit : all of evil was treasured as giused ble&siugs ; the verv gladness of hk ¡Or » о heart, lamented, as a sai iple of incipient crime. " I made this wor!d my idol,"* he said " like Aaron, I set up tlie golden edf f and I murmur at the leprosy it et*- taileth.
taileth. Ah, my friend !" and he grasp¬ ed ïae h-md of the knight, " when I re¬ vise the dream of my life, I feel it God's rnercy that I am here in perfect sanity : my draught has been dashed with bit¬ ters ; and but for the balm of Christian piety, but for the healing incense of de¬ votion, with the mourning patriarch. I might cry out, ť Strangling is better than life/' Time, the common despoiler of all things earthly, had wrought strange ha- vock io the gay and the brave knight vvho had shared in the pilgrimage to WaKingham: care sat upon his brow, md grief and indignities banished all signs of his native cheerfulness ; the bland smile had yielded to moody thonght ; the jocund jest, the " flashes of merriment, that were wont to set the tabfe on a roar," had given place, to deep-seated rancour and festering hate. It was the thorn of local ill, which turned his " sweet blood to gall/' and g 5 changed
changed the native current of his feel¬ ings: violence and outrage had burst upon the home of his hopes ; in the dead of night* in the neaeeful dream of security, an armed band, had saekeu his castle, and given his possessions to the reckless flames: his children, his household, his dependants, his familiar friends, had passed from the sleep of rest to the sleep eternal :—his wife, the gentle partner of his weal and his woe ? shrieking, like the seared bird from her nest— liad fled from Melienyth—had yielded up her tortured spirit, uncano- pied by ought save the heavens. ** Hapless Gladys !" sighed sir Roger, wrestling with his griefs, and wiping the death-damps from his forehead, " the cold earth was thy bed : and as I pillow¬ ed thy head upon my bosom—as I mark¬ ed the lurid ray streaming from our burning home—upon thy wan cheek, I swore to revenge tby murder—I called God
God and his angels, to witness my vow of relentless and unbounded hate !" " Upon the banditti ?—upon the mid- iiicrbt nlimrlerpr?" askor! the* Ännddfrimr baron. " Upon the league, plotting the over¬ throw of our king," exclaimed Morti¬ mer ; " upon Leicester, and Gloucester, and all the fell rebels, cowering under the name of patriots. Tell me, my friend" — and his eyes sparkled with their wonted lustre — " have I not cause—more cause than thyself, to let my beard grow, and turn monk ?" " vVe best know 7 the weight of our own burdens," said the baron, after a long pause. " The visitations, ordained by Heaven, are light as the thistle's beard it is the penal fires we drag upon our¬ selves, which fall as molten lead." " Dreadful then must be the recogni¬ sance of England," observed sir Roger ; " for mine are not the only wrongs, cry¬ ing up to the judgment seat Here ? at g 6 Hanslape,
Hanslape, thou hast lived, my lord, iu seclusion from the world ; thou knowest not the fearful laxity which prevails, or the deadly sins gendered in the name of reformation. The nobles, the vassals, mankind at large, are mad : they run after the idols of their ovvn creation : in the aberration of their loyalty, they for¬ get honour, and justice, and common., humanity : blood is as water; life as the air bubble : listen to me, whilst I re¬ count, some of the disasters, now sharp¬ ening the hell-goad of civil war. 1 will not linger o'er my ovvn peculiar evils, lest they unfit me for general matter; my struggle was soon over, and driven from my government in South Wales, and dispossessed of all Buelht, I fleel to England—fled, to see the standard of revolt, grasped by the hand of our chief nobles. Oh, my lord ! oh, my friend ! here, in the homage of your dependants, and the obedience of your children, how can you dream the crimson die of the picture !"
picture !" A convulsive spasm passed over the features of the baron ; he bent his head upon his breast, but he spoke not. " I cannot place bounds to the deadly poison/' pursued Mortimer : " well may I liken it, to the floodgates of the ocean, to a mighty torrent, bursting its dams, and washing away its barriers. Acts of open hostility have commenced: the whole land is torn by contentions and strifes : Simon de Montford is the elected general of the rebel forces ; and all, whom the king, or the queen, or prince Edward, best love, and best va¬ lue, are marked for destruction and for outrage. The barons denounce all as enemies who aid not the hellish enter¬ prise ; anel thousands, and tens of thou¬ sands, from the love of power, or the thirst of ginn, or dread of personal ill, now swell the tumultuary legion." The baron started from his seat : his lips quivered with horror and dismay— William was the blasting firebrand that seemed
seemed to scathe the vitals of his coun¬ try ; and the deadly groan, which burst from his labouring heart bore indication of his sympathy. " Thou art moved/' resumed the knight ; " thou bosomest the same bravt heart as when we parted in brighici seasons! I come to tax that heart; tc» reap the gathering of thy strength ai al interest : Hanslape, 'tis needful, everv able arm draw sword in the cause oí loyalty—I come, in the name of the royal Henry, to crave the boon of tin aid; to ask for thy William, thy Hu¬ bert, thy retainers, and men at arms : nay, all thou canst bestow/' " Hubert parted hence this blessed mom,"said the baron, strugglingdown tht agony of his own peculiar feelings ; si he journeys on the mission of grace, to the Augustine canons at Kenihvorth," i% And William ?" ss^ed sir Rogei de Mortimer. The baron spoke not—his head droop¬ ed
ed lower—and his very lips faded to clay. " The rose-bud of thy garden has hlovvu into beauty/' he continued, won¬ dering and doubtful, " yet would 1 learn, of the younglings, William, and the chance foundling of the copse- w ood. Marry ! Hanslape"—with a flash of his native pleasantry— " I always account¬ ed him % God-send/' " And he has proved so—and he is so," faltered tho baron-—" God is ever merciful " 4ls man, fitful, ungrateful man; 'tis——-' " Nay—nay/' interrupting him, " of thy son ; 1 would ask bui of thy son ?" " My son ! my son '" with a start of agonv—" I have no son—1 have lost m v son." ¡t " illas, dead !" exclaimed the knight, and tears of pity and of feeling, fast ga¬ thered in his eyes. Hanslape buried his face in his spread hands; the conflict within seemed wellnigh suffocating ; and
and when he looked up, he looked as one stricken unto death. " William Is dead in this house," he solemnly pro¬ nounced ; " his memory, blotted and de¬ spised ; his name erased from the lists of honour." " Not so—I trust, not so, w said Mor¬ timer : " some brainless folly ; soi rie trip¬ ping of the judgment We must look back to our ovvn green and unripe da¬ rings, nor measure youth by tl·*- -4 rigid standard of grey hairs and wrinkles/' " I could forgive ought save what it is/ murmured the baron; "aye, and what it is, did penitence and expiation dawn/ " Time, time, my good friend/' urged the knight, " will stay the fire, and cool the fever. Doubt it not, William will eke out the blessing; William------" " Readest thou not my barrenness," sternly interrupted the tortured father ; " seest thou not, that I stand alone— that my leaves are blighted—my head covered with mildew ? I pray no more
more of William. Had he never been —had he sank like some fair flower—I might have mourned him, loved him, joyed in the springtide of his promise : but now—now------" He ceased—he turned aside his face—then, with a des¬ perate effort, continued : " But now, to circumvent treason ; now, to smother the cockatrice in the shell. A simple Чопе slew the giant of Gath; and what are myriads of men, against him whom the Lord anointeth?" " I too have much faith," rejoined Mortimer ; " but to see the straits of this wretched land, is to probe the very quick and marrow of fortitude. Knowest thou not, that the whole of tiie Cinque Ports have revolted from the king? —that indignity and violence has been offered tí) his most sacred person ?—that the citizens of London, leaguing with the rebellious barons, and headed by Leicester, and Thomas Fitz Richard, have denied him and prince Edward entrance
entrance into the city?—that spite ot the ban of the archbishop of Canterbury, despoliation and violence, and fire and blood, mark the track of the traitors ?— that retaliation spreads in terror; tliat—" " I know little, vet I know 7 too much," interrupted Hanslape, and he breathed a shuddering sigh. " Alas ! vengeance is unbeseeming in the hand of man, though mortal offence ealleth for mortal arbitrament. I would wish peace to be effected, and goodwill to be restored." " We have strove hard for peace—we have sacrificed much for peace," resumed sir Roger—" I say wc, my lord, be¬ cause, my strength and influence, i*. wedded to the fortunes of my liege the king. But all of mortal effort has but brighter kindled the fire of discord : peace has been ofttimes hastily patched, yet far more hastily broken ; and now, goaded and spurred by the bitterest ex¬ tremity of insult ;—for to the royal summons,
summons, sir Richard de Grey, the con¬ stable of Dover castle, has peremptorily withheld the keys; and the factious citi¬ zens of London, assembling at the ring- ïïirp r\Ç +1hû rfiOol li^al i"if Qf Poiil'c Vľlflí drums, and banners, and streaming fire¬ brands, have scoured the country, de¬ stroyed the suburbs of Westminster, burnt the splendid manor-house belong¬ ing to the king of the Romans, and plundered and massacred without pity to age or sex :—the royal Henry, so¬ journing at Oxford, by writ and sum¬ mons, with horse and with arms, calls together his military tenants, to abet and aid him in the strife." " I will go myself," exclaimed the baron, brightening into energy and action—'* I will rivet the bosses of my ovvn war-gear—1 will head my own vassals, and meet thee, William, face to face, and sword-point to sword- point." " William !"
" William !" echoed Mortimer, aghast and terror-struck. The shudder of the baron was as the mortal shudder of dissolution ; for some moments he was silent, then extending his hand, " I am the father of William," he pronounced ; " and William, was born and reared beneath this roof—but his principles liis accursed bias, is as fo¬ reign to my principles, to my bias, as the purity of heaven to the blackness of hell. God can bear me witness, I would give life—and more than life—to know- it otherwise: but in this pass to eter¬ nity, we must take things as they arc, not as we would have them. William deserts his standard—he maculates the purity of our fame—he lends his name to the swollen catalogue of rebellion —he abets the counsels of the traitor Leicester! I have cursed the hellish feud ; and but for the angel who bore him, now r , even now, would I curse him also." He
He ceased, but Mortimer could only grasp his offered hand; he could not speak ; he eould not offer consolation in a case so woe-fraught.—" When last we parted," pursued the baron, " our specu¬ lations bore a different colour : 'tis but a crying prooi 4 of the versatility of earthly things : } uii, I, laboured for a different issue ; you lived to sanguine anticipa¬ tion—I lived in my children." His voice faltered ; he strove, but he eould not hide the tear which wellnigh blind¬ ed him ; dashing it away, and inwardly wrestling \ ith his feelings, " Whilst in the fiesh/' he continued, " we must feel the weakness of the fiesh ; yet there aro recollections, strong, subduing, tortu¬ ring recollections, which will prevail." i( Aye, my friend," said Alortimer ; %i and there are hopes, which will rise, spite of conviction. Said you not, things on earth were versatile? How know we then, that the heart of Wil¬ liam, vere not back to honour? Hope" —and
—and he spoke with the energy of ge¬ nuine sympathy—" like the eye to the body, is light to the soui ; it is the ray which dapples this world's gloom ; it is the ethereal day star, shining, and pier¬ cing beyond the tomb !" " My hope, here below," replied the baron, and his accent was utter despond¬ ence, " lies in the conscientious discharge of my spiritual and my temporal duties. I would file aw ay the rust which blisters my escutcheon ; I would restore the late unblended honour of mv name, and then would I die, lor then may my earthly mission be accomplished/' A long and mournful pause succeeded ; the baron sat, with hands clasped, and eyes bent upon the ground—Mortimer, with every feeling, keenly excited, in the dereliction of De Maudit : he re¬ membered his youth, his eariy promise, and he longed to question further ; yet he feared to probe anew, wounds, which time eould never cicatrize. " Saidst thou
thou not," at length questioned the baron, " that at Oxford, Henry craveth the succour of every staunch and loyal arm ?' " Yea, my lord, 1 have said so, but " Then, be our private woes sacrificed to public benefit/' interrupted the baron ; " then, be our griefs immolated to the crying wrongs of our anointed monarch. God be my witness, the death of Alice —the death of our first-born Henry— is¬ as nought to the death of William's honour· they only left me * for the calm of Heaven;"—he- dares my sword to seek a sheath in his rebel heart. Be it my destiny, and the blow will be sure, be it on the fast of St. Dunstan, and the ruin will be accomplished." His shud¬ der, w r as seen, was almost heard; he felt, as though standing on the dark cold verge of the grave—as though the sinewy hand of fate, was hurling him headlong into the abyss. " I trust
" I trust the struggle may never come," said sir Roger, feelingly. " And w r hy not, my brave friend?" forcing a ghastly smile—" why not, where strength poise in an opposite balance? Should it prove so, in Heaven —in Heaven alone, I must seek con¬ solation :—as the bird of paradise, I must not rest my foot on earth. But no more of self: 'tis of the king I wrould ques¬ tion ; 'tis of wretched England I would learn ?" " Vain vvould I paint the monstrous evils, raging in the name of reformation/' rejoined the knight; " it saturates our fields with blood; it gives our castles, and our lands, to pillage: our very hinds, catching the raging madness, troop to the standards of the rebel leaders; for Leicester, and Leicester's ..sons, and the fierce Gloucester, and Al¬ bemarle, and Norfolk, and Warren, and " a whole host of turbulent spirits, for¬ swearing
swearing allegiance, bay their lawful sovereign." " Time has been," eagerly exclaimed the baron, " when my arm was firmer : but never was my sword of better tem¬ per;—not when led by the gallant Pem¬ broke—not at the siege of Mount-sorel —not when reaping laurels in the bloody field of Lincoln—not when expelling prince Louis of France, and ensuring to our royal Henry, his legitimate king* dom ! Domestic ill, and almost hermit- solitude, may have dimmed the lustre of the blade: but now, ш Henry's ser¬ vice, will I wield it; now, at Henry's bidding, shall it fly its sheath, and find no second scabbard, but in the breasts of Henry's enemies." " Thou wilt join our band ; thou wilt aid our cause ; thou------" " Aye, to the death/' interrupting him. " I am the subject, 1 am the ser¬ vant of Henry Plantagenet; and more may he claim my prowess, in redemption vol. iu. я of
of a son's delinquency. Tarry one night at Hanslape, good Mortimer; tarry, until I muster my chief strength, and then for Oxford, and for action/'
CHAP-
νιΐΛΐ i tAl V 1.
r.tïiilaïul, bťíiiud m vuth the triumphant ^еа ? Whose s - 'ску ^1)<л'е beats tiaek the envious siege Of wastry Neptune, i> now hound in ".ith shame. -НЛКЕЧИГ ARE. Long after Hubert w r as safe housed with the holy canons of St. Margaret's, did the bright and beamy vision of the lady Ingelriea Fitzparnel, hover, like a spirit of the sky, o'er his mind, and o'er his feelings. This then was the Circe, vvho had cast her spells and her snares, o'er the judgment of the ill-starred Wil¬ liam ; wno had fashioned the rivets of illusion, and trained him to the hardi¬ hood of disobedience: this was the fair witch, who rivalling the influence of the parent, uprooted all the budding virtues of early promise ; who, binding him in H 2 the
the rosy gy vts of pleasure, and steeping his youth in deleterious delirium, doom ed maturít ν to barrenness, arid age to fitful remorse. " No, no, not love ; it cannot be lov е, ' mused Hubert, pressing down the pang at his heart, and recalling the ardem gaze, and flushed cheek, of his earliest companion ; ( ' it must be maddening frenzy; it must he, that debasing pa> sion, against which we pray, and again** which we ought to guard» Would to God, that I could root out the night shade! vvould to (iod, that I could wcs!» in my own blood the misty scales froî. before his eyes !" lie heeded not the stealing flight oi the hours; he stood, alone, and loncU with fancy racked, and mind bevvildeied, betwixt past and present; wondering, that a creature, so transcendeu tly lovely, could be ought other than angel—that a casket, so rare, could enshrine a gem so worthless—that the trail of the ser¬ pent
pent, could shadow a track so bright! He forgot, that sin is most destructive when most disguised; that stripped of its flowers and its fallacies, it must scare, where now it but beguiles: he forgot, that man lives the dupe of his ovvn warring passions; that his pass, through this world of storm and peril, is like unto himself, illusive! With a mind, cumbered w ith many cares, he joined in the devotions of the spiritual fathers, sharing in the rites of fanaticism, and humbling himself, even as he saw them humble. Fostered in the strict obser¬ vance of blind zeal, he diverged not from the narrow track of conformity : he read witchcraft in lieu of fascination : and he prayed against the fearful spell, which vitiating the judgment of De Maudit, chained him, an apostate to his principles, and an alien to his duty. Often did he contrast, his ovvn spirit- wearing suspense, with the gayer pas¬ times of his estranged friend ; following и 3 him
him through the mazes of the chase, conjuring his very looks, his very thoughts, as he hung entranced upon the smile of beauty. " He knows me a sojourner at St. Margaret's,* 5 he would sigh ; " and God grant, the struggle of native feeling become victorious !" but the day waned in doubt and in silence; the struggle might, or it might not, be great in the heart of William, for alas ! the effect lay obscured. Sacrificing pride to the stronger im¬ pulse of affection, and hoping even against probability, Hubert quitted the convent : he glanced around, as though in expectancy; but he heard no step, he traced no advancing figure : silence and solitude prevailed : the plains were dappled with evening sunshine; and the hills, and the woods, glowed with purple and rosy hues. He struck into a path winding down the valley ; it led to the castle of Kenihvorth, and he pur¬ sued
sued it with a heavy heart ; the charm of human existence, dissolving and la¬ ding, and dreads and surmises crowding on each other. De Maudit was indeed lost to his former self ; the wily links of pleasure held him in willing bondage; he lived the creature of sense, blind and dead to every former call. Hubert shuddered ; he felt a sickening pang at his heart ; it was, as the blight of peace, as the total annihilation of every fond and flattering hope, " As I came forth, so must I return," he exclaimed, in the bitterness of dis¬ appointment; " my mission, unblest; my office, to bear back misery to those I most love. Yet will I probe thee* William ;—will I seek thee, in the midst of thy vile associates : though I die fbr it, will I speak truths, astounding truths —and daggers too, though I would not use them." He passed onwards; he beheld the castle towers, frowning in gloomy splen- H 4 dour,
dour, and darkening beneath the rapid strides of night ; the drawbridge up ; the ramparts manned ; and war and defiance, menacing from each huge battlement. Anxious and eager, he cowered amid the trees—he hovered around, as though the slave of guilt or mystery ; to ad¬ vance, was to dare imprisonment and persecution: and though the upright principles of his nature, spurned con¬ cealment, yet more than life hung upon the venture; it was the peace of his benefactor, it was the hopes of his be¬ nefactor, which imposed caution, and taught him to be wary. ** Should I fall," he mused, " who shall bear the tale to Hanslape ? Should I become tangled in the accursed meshes of politic treason—should I be con¬ demned to breathe out ray youth and my strength in the dungeons of Kenil¬ worth, who shall explain my absence and my silence ?" Tbe words of father Gilbert broke with
with appalling force upon his memory—- Should he denounce thee to the arch* fiend Leicester —and his faith, in the honour, and in the humanity of De Maudit, weakened. Dreadful, deadly, was the pang at his heart; almost mor¬ tal, the chill which crept over him : he could not move, for his limbs trembled ; he could not speak, for emotion and anguish chained his tongue : it was, as the annihilation of every earthly pro¬ mise—as the last struggle of human dependance —as the death of trust, in the probity of William. He sunk upon the cold earth; he seemed as one cut off from joy and hope ; tears, blinding tears, dimmed his sight, and long was it, ere reason and religion conquered the utter despondence of his feelings: he prayed for fortitude and strength, for conduct through the tangled woof he was doomed to ravel ;—he prayed, and his prayers found grace, for he arose, h 5 with
with a spirit, tempered, though sad- <$&ned. The night thickened ; the giant out¬ line of Kenilworth grew fainter: he turned from the stupemlous pile; he shrunk away; he plunged deeper inti* the woods : anon, the dusky landscape became silvered, and imperfectly lighteti by streams of dewy moonshine : a steal¬ ing awe succeeded the late tumulb in his soul ; " thick coming fancies" crowd¬ ed on each other; his thoughts winged from earth; he mused o'er the super¬ stitions of the ghostly fathers, until bosoming the infection, the sighing breeze, seemed as the plaint of those spiritual beings, who are said, to í. —„---------.v\ ai«, the cai t h Unseen, both »hen <ле wake аил .u.* ^t . « ŕp Again must we remind our readers, that we tread the darkened passes of the thirteenth century; that we lead back to the gloom and bigotry, which then cramped
cramped and fettered the judgment; certain is it, that the musty" nende of antiquity, savour of what we deem su¬ perstition ; that strangers to the noonday light of instruction, confining all of wis¬ dom and knowledge to the conventual cell ;—fbr to copy the words of an ancient author in those early days, it was judged, " quite sufficient, for noblemen to winde their hom. and to carry their hawke fair; and leave study and learning to the children of mean people :"·— man yielded his ready ear to credulity, and his heart to blind and intemperate zeal. With a mind attuned to sad fancies, Hubert retraced the path to St. Mar¬ garet's, resolving to unburden his full heart, and to crave counsel and succour, at the hands of the father superior. As he emergcel from the umbrageous re¬ cesses of the wood, he traced the figure of a man, toiling the steep before him : he was close wrapped in a dark cloak ; and like unto himself, seemed speeding η 6 towards
towards the convent Could it be De Maudit? Hk pulses quickened at Un¬ bare possibility, шва he bounded onward. with the swiftness of tabled tear. He gained upon the stranger—he almost trod upon his lengthen«*! shadow, yet te reached him not, until the bell had answered to his vigorous puli Τ he- gate was unbarred : the well-known ac¬ cent of William, questioned of the so¬ journer Hubert;—and Hubert, breath¬ less and aiger, forgetful of every w rong, and forgiving every seeming unktnd- ne&s, sprung speechless to the side of his friend. Without the exchange of a single sentence» they crossed the court-yard, itnd Hubert, almost suffocated with con¬ tending emotions, ¿ought the direction oi* hk ceH " To tbe garden," whispered De Mau¬ dit ; " our converse must be unheard— unwitnessed: neither eye or ear must register against us." ^ Be
** Be it so f and Hubert, passing down the eloisters, and erossing the grass- grown cemetery of tbe convent, entered the garden, and struck into its loneliest path ; it was o'ershadowed with yew and cypress, and winding in many a mazy labyrinth, it terminated in a kind of hermitage*, erected by a former abbot of St. Margaret's, and set apart for prayer and self-commune. " Here, no ear can reach, no eye can penetrate/' said Hubert,pausing: "here, William, witnessed, by nought, save Heaven, I would call your thoughts to the past—1 woukl awaken, in your heart and in your feelings, the dream of eariy home—I would hold up a mirror —I would------/' " ( )f my father—alone of my father/ interrupting him : '* beyond, spare your¬ self and me." " Of your father—of your sister—of every member of Hamlape," resumed the agitated Hubert : " for, though lost to
to honour, still, still, William, are you dear, to those whom your aberrations have most injured. Nay, frown not. I believe you the dupe of rank deception —I know you entrapped by a snare too subtle for man. Now, even now, would I tax my life upon the genuine probity of your nature. This very morn, I read it all, in the smiling mischief at your side : for her favour, have you bar¬ tered principle; for her pernicious love, have you murdered hope." " For her love ! say you, for her love !" exclaimed De Maudit. " Saints of pa¬ radise! with ten thousand worlds, vvould her love be cheaply purchased !" Hubert grasped his arm, and gazed earnestly in his face.-—" Will woman's love—will the frail sunbeam of a mo¬ ment," he asked, " compensate for all beside ?" William struggled—he tried to break from his hold.—Torture røe not," he
he implored—" leave me to myself— leave me to my destiny," " Say not your destiny," eagerly re¬ joined Hubert. " Man, the free agent of his own actions, carves out bliss or misery. No, no, my friend ; it is not a frown can scare me from your side. I have followed, sought j t ou, even here; and I will cling to you, hunt you, sup¬ plicate you, until death." " Know you not," asked De Maudit, inwardly wrestling for the mastery of feeling, " that officious, meddling inter¬ ference, is at best offensive?" Huberts blood mantled in his cheek, yet he controlled himself.—" True friend¬ ship," he replied, " cannot be daunted, cannot be chilled, even by the frøst of unkindness. You may wound, Wil¬ liam, but you eannot anger me." " I would neither wound or anger," said De Maudit ; " I would but stickle for the right of action." " Have you not bartered that right? —have
—have you not invested that right, in hands, which------" " Have a care," sternly interrupting him ; " even you may probe too deeply." " Not if I know your heart—not if I know your nature. Dearest William, I eome from the side of your sorrowing father—I come armed, in all that love, in all that friendship can devise." " Know you, that you come in the very teeth of peril ? Wedded to opposite parties, how can we meet as friends ?" " Ah ! 'tis that alienation, 'tis that fatal alienation, I would sift out and learn. Tell me, I adjure you, tell me, the fatal strides to your undoing; the mining ruin, which has engulphed us all; the accursed sophistry, which has beguiled you of yourself? Be brief, answer me, for my question is of vital import" " I am not used to sueh a peremptory mode of inquisition/' sternly observed De Maudit ; « neither------" " Used,
" Used, or not used/' interrupted Hubert, in a tone, and with a loofe of determined earnestness, "you must bear with me; nay, more, you must answer me/' " Who shall enforce it?" " Nature—humanity. 'Tis true, no show of blood registers the broken heart, and sophistry, and false reasoning, may say, age can kill: but will your h^i^ side with the sophistry ?—will your con¬ science, be content with the reasoning ? Your father ------ " As he spoke, he raised his ej/es to the face of William, and whether from the moonshine falling askaunt his cheek, or whether from in¬ ward struggles, his cheek was bleached to almost statuary wanness. " What^-what of my father ?" arid De Maudit gasped for breath. " Your father wails you with tears of blood, mourns you, with a bruised and broken spirit." " And he sends you here," quick re¬ sumed
surned William, rallying into firmness, " to scare me from the cause of freedom : but be warned, Hubert; the purlieus are dangerous: thev are thick set with precipices and pitfalls." " Were they set with torture and with death, still would I brave them," exclaimed Hubert ; " still would I force truth's wholesome lesson on your ear. No, on my soul, the baron knows nought of this appeal. I come, once more to urge to reflection; once more, to set before you, the total, the irremediable ruin of your career." " I must brave it—I will brave it"— and De Maudiťs look and tone vas desperation. " Oh, say not so, William ! dearest William, on your souľs immortal peace, say not so! It is not tt > late, to be virtuous, to be happy : return with me to Hanslape : abjure the counsels of des¬ perate men ; listen to me ; bear with me : be again the William of brighter davs. I would
I would wound, but to heal— I would probe, but to find way to escape—I would------" " No more—no more! 'Tis vain words; 'tis useless, profitless exertion. Have I not said, I must creep away, with a father's curse upon mj r head?— havel not said, I must drown memory in the tumults of the world ? Since that fate- fraught hour, all has been chaos here"— and he struck his hand upon his breast —" and now—now, because my father drives to the preHpice, you would snatch me back from the leap. I tell you, Hubert'—and every feature grew con¬ vulsed—* 4 we are foes, sv/orn foes to each other ; we are leagued in opposite ser¬ vices : voti, with the tyrant Henry; I, with the brave champions of my coun¬ try !" " Dreadful! dreadful!" faltered Hu¬ bert, wiping the death-dews from his forehead. " Ytt is it so—-must it be so/' wildly pursued
pursued De Maudit: " there lies no alternative: anon, 'twill be crime to parley ; we are foes, bitter, deadly foes ; and the season approaches, when blood " Hold ! not foes ! say not foes, dear William. Can you meet, as a foe, the companion of your cradle?—him, vvho has loved you—who does love you— more than all the false, false herd, now r basking in your confidence ? I tell you, and I will speak it, though at the peril of life—they have misled you—and they will mislead you—and they will destroy you, body and soul, here and hereafter ! Nay, turn not away your face ; look at me, William : my motives are pure ; my heart will bear searching ; 'tis warm ; 'tis devoted to your happiness, to your welfare. return no more to Kenihvorth ; hie with me to Hanslape : cast yourself on the known mercy of your father, and all may be well, all may be redeemed." *' Perchance," and De Maudiťs accent wa*
Was bitter scorn, " you would counsel, to the heartless policy of impeachment ; you would teach of self-security ; you would bid me curry grace and fa vou f , through the accursed medium of volun¬ tary commitment; you——" " How have I earned this at your hands?" asked the heart wrung Hubert; " how have I provoked a taunt so keen ? No, no, William, I woukl but uphold the honour of your ancient house—I would but labour for the puritj' of your ilune. and withdrawing you from con¬ tamination, steer you unsinged through the fire—I would know you free from stain, your name—expunged from the swollen list of rebels and of traitors—re¬ corded in the iron nomenclature of hu¬ man action, without spot or blemish, undefiled, imcontaminatod, preeminent in virtue, and pure, as unsunned snow, from vice and shame. 'Tis nobler, to break the toil, and abjure the vice, than to yield wilful obedience to known crime ;
crime ; 4is easier, to scape with seeming guilt, than to buckle on the killing pon¬ derous gyves of sin and woe. I tell you, William·—and in the face of hea¬ ven I pronounce it—this Leicester, like unto the devil in the blessed garden of paradise, would coax you, wheedle you, win you to your ruin ; he would steep vou in the die of his owrn blackness; and aided by his tutored emissary—subtle and beauteous as the sirens of ancient story—playing on your warm feelings, on your unpractised heart, would plunge you, head-and-ears, into the damning pit of his own delving. This Leicester —this fair witch! this peerless Ingel¬ riea !» -----" " Hold ! Hubert, hold ! friendship can find no palliative for words like these" — and De Maudiťs ejes were flames—and De Maudiťs hand grasped at the but of his sword. " Though you sheath it here, in my heart/* firmly pursued Hubert, ** yet will
will I speak whilst strength remains : it it is but the body, William : the mind, the feelings, you have stabbed already." He paused ; he gazed earnestly on the convulsed'and agitated features of his friend ; he traced the heavy struggle of native affection, and he augured coming good, in the half averted, half humid eye, which sank beneath his own. " You will bear with me—I see you will bear with mc," he continued—" God be praised ! you cannot forget the past ; you cannot dissolve the sacred link wdiieh binds us; you------" " Be brief/' interrupting him. " Time wanes, and must not be spent unprofit¬ able" " It shall not be spent unprofitably/' eagerly replied Hubert, " for I will touch the wound, so light, e'en passion shall not wince. Dearest William, nought remains to guess at ; the subtle page of doubt and sophistry, lies open now before me ; this morning, furnished clue.
clue. I read it in the eyes of beauty ; 1 traced the birth of error, in the smile of fascination. The lady Ingelriea h the ward of the earl of Leicester ; and the earl of Leicester, the chosen general of the rebel forces, governs through this rare and peerless emissary. I grant, the temptation strong ; too strong, perhaps, forman : I can feel— í can estimate---- —" " Hubert/* exclaimed De Maudit, and his voice tokened deadly meaning, " cast the eve of interest, breathe the mt 7 sigh of passion, and by the hell which goads me, murder will ensue !" " Fear me not," said Hubert, ear¬ nestly: " it is not woman con ¿áve the lie to my professions : no, De Maudit, woman, unadorned by diffidence, un- graced by bashfuiness and timid mo¬ desty—however baited by the soul-trap, beauty—is to me, as baleful poison ; is, as the waxen fruit of Sodom, guileful to the sense, but deadly to health and life. Fear me not"—and he spoke with con¬ fidence
fidence and ardour—" was the lady In¬ gelriea, fairer than the daughters of earth—was she more rare than ought in woman's mould—knowing her princi¬ ples, my heart would be cold as ice, to all her charms, and all her blandish¬ ments," " Her principles !" echoed William : %t how know you, her principles, less perfect than her form?" ·· Mine is no idle guess," resumed Hubert, " neither do I give sound to mere opinion. Said you not—-or rather, w i ote you not, when first you wandered from the blessed security of Hanslape— that the smile of this lady Ingelriea, as heaven's sunbeam, shone alike on all ? Hah ' you start—you writhe beneath the consciousness' Tell me; let your heart speak to me'-—and he clung to his arm, and he gazed steadfastly in his face —" can the indiscriminate smile of mere beauty, compensate for all beside ?—can a creature, lending her charms, to a deep vol. ш. ι per-
pernicious conspiracy, recompense a fa¬ ther's broken spirit—a father's breaking heart? No, no, William ; honour, and hap¬ piness, and prosperity, live in a father's blessing; shame, and ruin, and despair, lurk in a siren's smile." He ceased, but De Maudit broke not the silence. for De Maudit, bowed his head, in bleeding sorrowing consciousness: the word* of Hubert, were as daggers to his soul ; they tore away the magic tissue of illusion, and left, bare and naked, his crime, and his penalty. Ingelriea had indeed a smile for ali ; a filile, to mould and fashion to her ovvn sinister purpose: she was a zealot in the mad cause of reformation ; and her smile bribed converts—and her smile. like flowers mantling a yawning chasm, <?urnbhed the headlong leap of destruc¬ tion. Ere now, had jealousy's scorpion Ling, stung and goaded the ill-starred William; ere now, had he writhed be¬ neath the smart ; ere now, had the smart
smart been lulled to rest, by the blan¬ dishments of angel beauty. His mind was dark and boding; his fancy, preg¬ nant with every ill, fitted to mental tor¬ ture; he felt not the bliss of security; he bosomed not that cordial balm to the sick soul, confidence ; he needed but the stimulating breath of accident, to rouse him into flame ; he awaited but the chance shadow of suspicion, to whirl him into frenzy. The ward of the earl of Leicester, had usurped his senses, had played upon his weakness, had irritated his warring passions ; she knew the powers of her potent beauty ; and I hough he possessed a lion's heart, she held him in a mesli, light as summer gossamer. 4 - 1 will seek her this very night," said De Maudit, starting from absorp¬ tion : " at her hands, I will crave recom¬ pense, for all the sacrifice 1 have made." ** And I," asked Hubert fearfully. " You must tarry here, with the sage 1 2 fathers
fathers of St. Margaret, until I hear my doom." " Our doom? said Hubert, empha¬ tically; "for should the maiden, chance to play the cozener, all alike are lost/" " Not so/' eagerly responded William. " Come what may, you are safe : my passport be your surety." " And the baron your father/' demand¬ ed the tortured Hubert. De Maudit turned aside his face; ík tried to smother down the emotion which wellnigh choked him.-— 4 · You¬ you, must be a son to the good old man," he faltered out; "you, and Isabel must bind the wounds I deal ! You and Isabel------" He ceased. " And you/' questioned Hubert, ** I must fulfil my destiny/' with <t flash of his wonted lightness, " and stem the torrent, ere İt overwhelm/' St Alas!" sighed Hubert, "how ill does this forced indifference, accord with your heart, and mine *" " Tis
" 'Tis an undue season to think of hearts," quickly resumed William : " we must leave hearts, to days of peace and sunshine : now, we must buffet the breakers." " Mother of God !" ejaculated Hubert, " will the days of peace and sunshine ever re-dawn ? Will wretched England, ever know the halcyon bond of concord ? Will her fitful, her intemperate sons------" " Aye," interrupting him, " when the king hears reason, and grants our char¬ tered liberties : and he must hear reason, and he must grant our chartered liber¬ ties, or at his door, be our wrongs, and our struggles—on his head, be every drop of blood, shed in the sacred cause." " Sacred," repeated the shuddering Hubert ; " dire perversion ! monstrous profanation ! Call it not sacred, fbr hell savours the deed ; ambition, revenge, hate, violence, mad persecution, inordi¬ nate malice, craving selfishness, and all which man terms baleful, instigates and ι 3 feeds
feeds this rank rebellion. I warn vou, 40 William—and I speak it with grief of heart—mix not in their pernicious meetings ; withdraw yourself from their midnight councils ; for not one agent in the work of treason, not one member in the whole hostile legion, who shall not reap shame, and garner up remorse." De Maudiťs smile was incredulity.— " You speak the sentiments of mere pre¬ judice," he exclaimed : " 'tis not a crown, can privilege injustice and per¬ secution/' "Tbe king, our liege master/' firmly observed Hubert, "is ever disposed to hold the scales of justice even. I grant those around him, biassed by selfish mo¬ tives, may strive to cast their wishes into the balance : but the royal Henry—-'* ťí Is man, and subject to the infirmi¬ ties of man," interrupted the intempe¬ rate William ; " and like man, must stand subject to the recognisance of jus¬ tice. 'Tis his capricious humours, his indis-
indiscriminate favour, his misjudging rule» which, now lighting the brand of civil war, steels every Briton's heart against him." " There spoke the subtlety of the in¬ sidious Leicester ; there the perverting sophistry, which glosses over crime ;" and Hubert looked the scorn he felt. " Think you, I have no judgment of my ovvn ?" asked De Maudit ; " that like a puppet, I move but at another's bidding ?" " It is your passions which lead your judgment captive," replied Hubert; " İt h the undue influence of artful beauty, which hurries you into snares. 'Would to Gou, you would see, and not tarry to prove, the fallacy of your dependance ' for such is the sanguine temperature of your nature, that conviction will fall, like blighting mildew, on your spirit. Neither age or experience fitteti! me for counsel : but we hear and read, in the proverbs of Sohnnon, that, * as a jewel ι 4 of
of g. ·Μ in a swine's snout, is a fair wo¬ man without discretion." " What mean you ?" fiercely demand¬ ed William. " Although I have dared to call her smile diffusive, the man who breathes a taint upon the angel purity of Ingelriea, must measure sword with mine." " There are imperfections, or foibles, if you like it better," said Hubert, calmly, " which wage against the peace of a confiding heart Ah, William! I should as soon take ruin to my bosom, as the woman, who, moulding her con¬ duct to the mad contentions of party, urges to the astounding jar of insubor¬ dination. Be wary, lest a second Jack cozen to the death-stroke.' De Maudit stepped fearfully back; he stood, abstracted, lost, his mind turn¬ ed, as it were, inward, and shuddering at the fearful record he surveyed. It was, indeed, the angel witchery of the lady Ingelriea, which had first tangled him
him in the maze of error and perplexity ; it was her bright and beamy beauty, her blandishments, and her charms, which had undermined his loyalty, sap¬ ped the counsels of his youth's instruc¬ tor, and leagued him in the toil of des¬ perate men.—" And what have I reap¬ ed ? ,J he mused, as his aching fancy measured the fearful height from which he had fallen-—" what have I reaped, save smiles ? and those smiles^—as hea¬ ven's sunbeam—shine alike on all." Of¬ ten had he pressed to confession ; often, on his knees, had he supplicated, one dawn of grace, one acknowledgment of reciprocal interest ; but the wily Ingel¬ riea, had baffled, without awakening terror ; had protracted, without exci¬ ting doubt; had spurred him on, to pledge his very soul to the cause she advocated, and fed him, with honeyed looks, and glosing words of courtesy. " And what have I reapeu ?" he again asked himself— i( what liave I garnered ι 5 up,
up, save smiles ? and those smiles—as heaven's sunbeam—shine alike on all" His start was madness; his look was torture ; he scarcelv breathed ; his hearťs pulsation felt to stop, and heavy death- damps gathered on his forehead. (( Be calm—-for mercy's sake, be ealm !" implored Hubert, terrified at his agony. " As well may you seek to govern the wind," vehemently pursueel De Maudit ; 4Í to preach to the raging sea ; to extinguish tlie fires of heaven. Tis you, who have stirred up the strife— 'tis you, who have awakened the devii within me.' (i Oh ! say not so," urgeel Hubert—'* 1, who would lead you back to hope and peace—I, who woukl weed from your heart, every fault/* " I feel the mighty weight of obliga« tion/' said De Maudit, with a bitter smile; α but intermeddling care, is ill-sea- boned, and unpalatable/' Hubert replied not ; he gazed long and
and sorrowfully on the convulsed and agitated features of his friend ; he traced the tumult within, and he pitied, where he eould not exonerate : his lip quiver¬ ed, and his cheek grew red and pale by turns. " I would not wound—I would not voluntarily inflict pain/' faltered Wil¬ liam, striving at something like repara¬ tion—" I would even thank and bless you, for all your kindness, and all your anxiety. Perhaps," hesitating, " I have spoken harshly—ungratefully"— and he held forth his hand. Hubert grasped the peace-offering; he had no words, but he had tears ; his beart was full, and the token of kindliness, like unto a verdant spot on a sandy desert, was smiling promise to his benighted fancy; it signed of returning amity, and he built, fondly built, on the past flexibi¬ lity of De Maudiťs feelings. " I would not wound you," repeated William, after an agitating pause ; " no, ι 6 believe
believe me, no : I would steer clear of offence; but there is a warring devil within me, which ever mars my better purpose. Forgive it all, dear Hubert, and let us part in peace." " No more—no more ;" and Hubert, precipitating himself upon the neck of his friend, held him in a clasp of almost painful fervour. William struggled, but William could not con¬ quer nature; perhaps it was one of his heaviest struggles; and his tears, too, fell, and his emotions were wellnigh suf¬ focating ; but they passed away, like unto a summer storm, and when he re¬ gained thought, he regained resolution. ** This is weak and unprofitable," he exclaimed : 4i because inclination leads to opposite quarters, must we whine and pine like senseless infancy ? Rather, let us re-nerve feeling, that when the trial come, we act as men." " The trial ! the accursed trial ľ groaned
groaned Hubert, " to arm a son against a father's life." " The trial," quick rejoined De Mau¬ dit, " to wrest power from the gripe */ tyranny—to restore to England, her le¬ gitimate rights. Hubert—Hubert, you are shackled, and iron-bound, by preju¬ dice and despotic habit. I can, and I yet will unrivet those shackles, and re¬ lax those bonds. Now, I must hence : time is ill fitting the parley. I will see you again. You must tarry here at St. Margaret's: you must not quit Kenil¬ worth : for known, as the adherent of Henry Plantagenet, more than liberty —life would be in peril/' " The same Power, who guarded me hither," piously pronounced Hubert— ν " the same Almighty Disposer, who af- fixeth bounds to the unruly wills of sin¬ ful men, will nerve me in my duty, and steer me through the peril !" De Maudit gazed at him in fearfrl doubt; b«? traced resolution, and forti- tudc%
tude, and firm courage, in the dark eye which met his, in the calm brow, which tokened most of sorrow. — " For my sake,* he urged ; " if only for my sake, promise me"—eagerly and anxiously— " I would see you once again—per¬ chance to be our last meeting.—Promise me then, Hubert ; and let me part with an assurance which never yet was vio¬ lated—your faith, your word, dear Hu¬ bert, and I shall seek you here in confi¬ dence." " And you shall find me here," said Hubert, firmly. " But will you not pass the walls of Si. Margaret ?" asked De Maudit; " will you not stray beyond the barrier of se¬ curity? List to me"—and his voice sunk to a whisper—" In these times of strife and bloodshed, the wanderer, and the wayfarer, move at hazarel ; nay, un¬ derstand me, courage is as nought in the gripe of power. When you jour¬ ney from Kenilworth, a passport be your
your surety, through the mines and pitfalls of party." " Who shall guarantee my safety ?" asked Hubert—" who shall shelter rne in the storm ?" " I—I will pilot midst the breakers ;" and William aimed at his wonted cheer¬ fulness; but the counterfeit was vile, and with an ill suppressed sigh, he con¬ cluded, " My signet be safe conduct through the stray forces of* our col¬ leagues. Doubt me not"—with impres¬ sive solemnity—" the indemnity of a father's comforter, be more precious than life '" Hubert essayed to speak, but De Maudit hastily checked him.—" Your promise—only your promise," he urged. " No more words—no more struggles." " Be it even as jou wish," said Hu¬ bert : yet when he found himself alone ; when he heard the last faint echo of De Maudiťs parting footsteps ; when he saw nought around, save moonshine and solitude.
solitude, save mourning cypress and fu¬ nereal yew, he almost regretted a pro¬ mise, which withheld him longer from Hanslape. He stood, heedless of the failing dew, clinging in murky wreaths, around ; heedless of the night-breeze ; heedless of all, save his own lacerated feelings; dwelling upon the inconsisten¬ cies of man, upon the contrarieties in De Maudiťs nature ; passing rapidly through the various vicissitudes of his Own eventful destiny, and pondering upon " that little world the human heart," until lost in the complex study : and long had waves of silvery light qui¬ vered in the east, ere he sought his pal¬ let, to muse, and to mourn.
CHAP.
v>Jrijŕ\jL JL xüjií/ \ 11.
"* К» meiiibrance \\oats u tliousand »hapt s, Απ«) bc ais tvìì thousand mhtows." The sun, bursting from his orient bed, shone bright on the multitude of " ser¬ ried spears" assembled in the court-yard of Hanslape. The war-horse champed his bit ; the warrior donned his armour : many a sword was drawn ; many a lance, fresh furbished, tokened of feudal power. The trumpet brayed ; the shrill cymbal, and pealing drum, warned from the trance of inaction : echo caught the cla¬ mour ;—it was the knell of peace ; it was the herald of ruin and of slaughter; it went forth, to scathe and to destroy; it swept, as a desolating blast, annihilating all of comfort and security. The blood-red standard of war trem¬ bled
bled in the hand of the baron : yet, as he waved it high in air, his spirit strengthened, and his nerves waxed firmer: all of individual weakness va¬ nished: it was in the cause of lovalt ν — it was to prop a falling throne—it was to avenge "an anointed monarch—it was, to pour upon the renegades, the full vial of retributive judgment; and heaven seernet! to smile upon the calling. His eyes swept over lhe close phalanx of his followers, and proudly and exultingly they turned on Mortimer; all of en¬ thusiasm re-dawned; all of the penitent lay hid in the soldier: he felt, that even he, was as a bar of iron in the cause he fathered ; he felt, as when in the spring¬ tide of his youth, as when fighting at the side of the gallant Pembroke; he felt alive to nought save heroism; he felt, his full heart, as staunch, as the polished mail, beneath which it wildly fluttered. Long and fervid was his harangue: he
he craved support; he craved unani- mitv; he craved, in the name of the king, fealty and courage: he glanced not at De Maudit: he spoke of nought to dam}) the ardour of his own feelings: he dwelt on his wedded devotion to the cause of Henry ; and then, he deepened the blackness of treason, even beyond its native die. It was a theme, to gift him with eloquence; and the flames of civil war raged fiercer, and the hell- hounds of discord, glutted with keener fury, in every type he fashioned. Shouts of defiance, shouts of vengeance, burst from every tongue : the clash of arms, commingling, gathering, swelling, dying, like peals of reverberating thunder: it seemed, as though one heart governed the assembly ; as though one spirit lent spring to action : and vast and potent was that spring ;—it crimsoned the cheek of the baron, and inflated him with pride and inborn consciousness.—" Would to God,"
God," he exclaimed, " our Hubert were now here ! would------" " And what of the maiden Isabel?" asked father Gilbert, who stood calmly at his side. It was the chord, to clip his heroism, and call him back to earth, and earthly care.—"Isabel," he murmured; "my darling Isabel ! Ah ! that she were now at Nuneaton, safe, beneath the fostering care of my saintly mother!" " Isabel is now at Hanslape," re¬ sumed the confessor, " and perchance, her station perilous." " Isabel is in the hands of Heaven," piously pronounced the baron : " here, at Hanslape, I commit her to the charge of Heaven's servant." The monk bowed his head.—" Pre¬ cious be the bequest!" he uttered. " But what availeth age and helplessness, against bold and prosperous power?" " Isabel is in the hands of Heaven," solemnly repeated the baron,' and my heart
heart waxeth even firmer than my arm. I depart hence—I leave her rich in the guerdon of a father's blessing—I go, to stem the rancour of desperate men, to haul down the standard of revolt, to force the rebel arm, to fealty and sub¬ jection—I go, to perform my duty, be the task ever so arduous." But the firm heart, the firm arni, trembled in the farewell clasp of affec¬ tion—Isabel stifled her tears, in pity to her father's struggles; she drew her wimple close o'er her face, yet did the hea vings of her bosom, betray her agi¬ tation. * 4 We may meet yet again," mur¬ mured the baron: "if not on earth, there" —and he pointed upwards. " Be comforted, child oí' my love. I go to redeem the bleared honour of Hanslape." Isabel only sobbed; she thought of her brother, armed in the hostile cause, and her cheek faded to snow, and her spirit died within her. " Bear up, dear one," pursued
pursued the fond father. " Although * the whole head be sick, and the whole heart faint/ our God, who willeth the trial, afflicteth but in mercy ! Bear up, and pray for the just cause;—pray for me—pray fbr thyself—pray for us all !" He spoke no more ; one hasty embrace, and then he fled the chamber ; and the next instant, striding his war-horse, headed his brave followers. " On—on, for God and the king !" were the last words which echoed through the halls of Hanslape; and knights and cross-bow-men, and esquires and horsemen, in crowds, crossing the drawbridge, shadowed the pathway of their dauntless leaders. Straits, and ha¬ zards, and hairbreadth scapes, tending on the ills of civil war, augmented the local dangers of travel : many a forest did they thread ; many a river did they ford ; many a heath, and many a barren moor, and many a morass, overgrown with rushes, and sedges, chequered their track
track of peril. The scathing fire of ruthless hate bad blasted the peace of the cottage : many a thatch lay black¬ ened ; many a tower of strength, and many a rude hamlet, still smoked be¬ neath the spoiling brand of human ran¬ cour. Where'er they turned, the besom of fate had devastated the land, for loneliness and ruin reigned ; in day, they moved in solitude ; and when "-------------Dun ni«hf, Wrapped its dense mantle" o'er all of earth, for short precarious rest, thev sought no bed, save the dew- steeped grass, no canopy, save the hea¬ vens. I low did each step, how did each tottering ruin, nerve the loyalty, and wed the heart and strength of* the baron of Hanslape, to the systematic and peaceful sway of legitimate rule ! in the desolation around hirn, he cursed the mad feuds of party ; in the depo¬ pulated and dismantled vestiges of for¬ mer
mer culture, he traced the demon ¡strides of insubordination, and mourned it, as the wreck of England's weak and Eng- lands «'torv. о " We sink, we pass away/* he ex¬ claimed, '* like the occultation of a bright plaint, which did shine, which might have shone, almost to dazzling! Oh! that tiie sons should blear the honour of their sires! Oh' that the laurels, reaped bv the sword of William the Xorman. and w abbed, by our lion-hearted Richard. in ! ao-an blood, should be mildewed bv deeds like these '" ,k You think too deeply/* i>aid sh Rugí r Mon imer, willing to rouse bhu from a dream, so every vav fitted t< probe individual feeling. ** 'Fake heart, my lord: with Goti\ grace, wc mav Vet bitrat from uur eclipsing cloud, and shine as bright, as though this temporary oc cuitation had never been/' " Is it you w ho say so?" reproachful I v «nked the baron. '* By the rood, I do ικύ
not credit you with a mind so base ! No, Mortimer, the ink-blot cannot fade : it will descend to latest ages ; it will blister the page, and stamp, with damning treason, the escutcheon of many an honest house." As he spoke, his brow lowered, and his inward shudder, au¬ gured the deep and bleeding wound within : yet was the cloud momentary ; —he glanced with exultation over the long extending line of his well-armed followers, and a smile, as a sunbeam, riding on the black bosom of the tem¬ pest, shone the precursor of many a ga¬ thering horror. " The time approaches," he pursued, " when nature shall be dead within us ; when the heart of flesh shall be changed to stone, and the nerves, become firm, as the weapon which deals the death-blow." " Aye," replied sir Roger Mortimer, catching the like heroism, and glowing with the like fire, " the time approaches, when England shall be rent asunder; vol. Ш. к when
when her fields shall be saturated щ native blood, and her sons, hunger and thirst after vengeance. Woe be on the disseminator of treason ! woe be on the abettor of every treasonable plot ! woe' —and then he paused, for the lips of the baron vvere wan as his forehead. " Woe and ruin," pronounced the zealous patriot, struggling down his feel¬ ings, and rending away every local claim—-" woe and ruin, here, and per¬ dition"—hereafter, he would have added, but his tongue cleaved to the roof oi his mouth, and his lips refused articu¬ lation. It was the enskicd form of his buried Alice, which glowing on me¬ mory, seemed to plead for her renegade son—it was the calm deep voice of pa¬ tient mercy, к noli i ng in the scared ear of conscious infirmity, judgment is not for man. He stepped fearfully back ; he crossed his breast, and he bowed his head, more like a culprit, than the ar- raigner of a fellow-mortal " Judgment и
h not for man," he exclaimed aloud, " and shall a mere worm, a thing of clay, cast the stone? God—God forgive me !" and he wept in the bitterness of the spirit. " All of flesh is heir to infirmity and sorrow," said sir Roger Mortimer, anx¬ ious to administer the cordial cup of consolation. " In youth, we may judge different, but experience bringeth home the astounding truth : we sojourn here for a brief season ; and whether that season, wane away, in sunshine or in shade, still it passeth ; like the leaves of summer, we bud—we blossom------" " And we wither," interrupted Hans¬ lape, laying his death-cold hand on the arm of the knight, " ere yet our hour of fruition," " It may chance so," rejoined sir Ro¬ ger. " fbr earth's pilgrimage is dappled and varied. Alas ' many a dark shadow has fate interwoven in my destiny, and к 2 yet
yet I have struggled, and will struggle to the end." " Never have you felt the ice-bolt of α son's delinquency," shudderingly pro¬ nounced the baron ; " never have you seen, your honours tainted, and your name disgraced. God grant me grace," and his eyes flashed the dire import of his soui, " that I expunge the mildew, that I wash away the stain, in my ovvn hearťs blood !" " The field lies open before us," re¬ plied Mortimer: " duty the spur to heroism—and Henry's foes must quail beneath our efforts. In the olden time, the sword hath ever carved the pass to preeminence : we read it of the warriors who shared the glories of William the Norman : and shall we not reap the like harvest?—-shall we not garner up the Hke renown ?" " The warriors, who owed allegiance to William the Norman," said the baron, in an accent of bitter sorrow, ** were faithful
faithful unto the death. They fought, they bled, they died, true to their prince, and to their own honour." " And we too, will fight, and bleed, and die," eagerly returned sir Roger Mortimer, " devoted to the cause of Henry Plantagenet, and true to our ovvn fealty. Aye, my lord," and he glanced with exultation o'er the close ranks of his followers, " we will lead yon brave men to action, and prove how valour moves but with one heart !" Day rose and waned in difficulty and peril; but what difficulty can quench the fire, what peril can daunt the per¬ severance of inborn loyalty ? The baron of Hanslape, in league with sir Roger Mortimer, dared every difficulty, and every peril, which civil war could wage ; dared all of personal hazard, and boldly and unhesitatingly trod, as it were, on the hot and reeking ashes, scathing the health, and vital strength of their coun¬ try. It was by the chance encounter of к S stragglers^
stragglers, detached from the main body, that they heard of the progress of king Henry's army ; of the total defeat of the hostile forces at Oxford, and of the king, aided by his son, prince Edward, and king Richard, his brother, pursuing his march to Northampton : and soon did Rumour's hundred tongues proclaim the victorious strides of the monarch ; and many a tale of crimson die, and many a death-fraught story, was coupled with the siege of Northampton. There too did fortune poise the scale in favour of the royal cause : great and terrible was the slaughter : the streets were deluged in human blood, and heaps of slain, and black and shapeless ruins, spoke the malevolence of party. The town, the churches, the very monasteries, were j r ielded up to pillage : Peter de Mont- ford, the cousin, and Simon de Montford, the second son of the earl of Leicester, were taken prisoners, and with гшпу barons, and many knights, were sent captive
captive to Windsor Castle. Quick fol¬ lowed the reduction of the city of Lei¬ cester; and inflated with victory, and panting for new conquests, the town and castle of Nottingham w r as speedily added to the list: and at Nottingham, does Walter Hemingford relate to us, that king Henry, and his nobles, kept the feast of Easter:—-and there, did the baron of Hanslape, and sir Roger Mor¬ timer, with their retainers and followers, enrol themselves beneath the royal stand¬ ard. There too, did disappointment and mortification tread upon the heels of hope; for the baron, jaundiced by moody care, and duped by his own sickly fancies, marked and mourned the ravages which time had wrought : there, elid he feel the bitter tax which long estrangement from the world entails on feeling; there, did he mark the fearful vacuum death and absence had effected : titles and honours, earned and worn by his once brave cotemporaries, were filled к 4 up
up and occupied by young and giddy spirits : the men, who had fought with him, who had bled with him, and from whom he had learned the lesson of war, were passed away, w r ere gathered to their fathers ! It was an appalling blank which every where met his eye, and the light smile, and sportive jest of merriment, were as mockery to his feelings. King Henry himself, had exchanged the po¬ lished brow, and smooth chin of boy¬ hood, for wrinkled thought and care: his son, the gallant Edward, cased in steel, and wearing the crest of defiance, looked the embryo hero of future glory : and many a name rose to his lips, and many a recollection hung upon his tongue, which time and fate had buried. Neither the noise and bustle of a camp, or the forms and ceremonies of a court, could awaken him from his dream of past years: those, who had moved in all the stately pride of youth and come¬ liness, who had shone amid the hard stripes
stripes and active enterprises of w r ar, as in the tilt~yard ? the rev^l, and sports of the ring—those had put off youth, had yielded up all of vain pretension. Reflection was food to melancholy ; and the whole life of the baron of Hanslape was tainted with melancholy ; for not the spirit-giving blast of the trumpet, not the " thought-drowning" peal of the drum, could rally him back, to human pursuits, and human speculations. " (/'er hľs dai к mind, the light oí" years gone by, (iltu.ned üke the meteors of a northern bkv." w' He glanced upon the crowd, sporting, like bees in the sunshine ; he smiled at the sanguine pictures of the youthful ; he pitied the vain mockeries, which con¬ sumed the hours of the matured; he sighed at the subtle shadows, which duped even the aged; he read, in the contracted circle, an epitome of the world at large, and he wondered, how, in a land of shadows, man could toil for ought save eternity. κ 5 The
The nobles, close hemming in the^ person of the monarch, and glittering in all the awful pageant of war, were, to his long dormant conception, a group oí strangers: the plumed bonnet, waved not over one single face familiarized on fancy : it was the relatives, and foreign connexions of queen Eleanor, who bask¬ ed in the April beams of king Henrys favour: the legitimate nobles of Eng¬ land, were estranged and absent; oi those, who still rallied around the royal standard, as the cotemporaries of pri net Edward, were in the springtide of their bloom. He liked not to own to him¬ self—and yet how could he hide from himself—a change so striking :—his ovvn enthusiasm, was as the enthusiasm ol youth, for he was wedded, by habit, anti by principle, to the reigning power. and his ardour, and his interest, and all the sinews of his strength, were freighted in the fortunes of Henry Plantagenet. It was zeal, which impelled the strict discipline
discipline of his retainers; which led early and late to the tented field ; which enforced self-privation, and lured from the festeriiiö* mine of individual sorrow. о " One duty to perform," he would articulate, " one .solitary duty, and then to Heaven, should life be spared, be my life dedicated." Diligently did he shrink away from every sound of social mirth, from ever) invitation to conviviality ; mirth was as hellebore to his galled and irritated fancy ; and spite of the feast of Easter, the season fbr sport and for revelry. Lent, eternal Lent, sombreei the days of his protracted pilgrimage. Once. amid the buzz of sounds, amid the clash and clamour of a camp, he heard the oft-repeated name of the earl of Lincoln : his pulses quickened, and he pressed through the throng, with an erect gait, anel an animated visage. Alas î it wa.> not the sunburnt countenance of a war¬ rior, seasoned by age and toil ;■—it was к 6 not
not the John de Lacy, who had fought at the siege of Mont-sorel, and mounted the breach at the storming of Lincoln ; —it was a young and animated stranger, ruddy with health and strength, whose arm was linked within the arm of prince Edward, and whose smile, and whose bend of graciousness, denoted nought save the courtesy of a stranger. " It is Henry, the son of the late gallant De Lacy," said the lord Philip Basset, deciphering regret, and sickening disappointment, in the saddened coun¬ tenance of the baron. " I knew his father—I loved his father!" and Hanslape stepped mourn¬ fully back. The youthful ear! paused, then gracefully raising his plumed helm, " Honoured by the son, be the friend oí the sire !" he pronounced ; and his ac¬ cent, was the accent of strong emotion. With more than wonted fervour, the baron grasped the hand extended ; he- rallied
rallied too beneath the notice of prince Edward; and he joined in the obser¬ vations which local circumstances called forth : but still was his spirit cumbered with sadness and gloom, for the short and perishable tenure of human strength, spoke in the response to each inquiry. All he had knowm, seemed passed away : -ome, rooted up, and scattered, and every braneh fallen; others, by mar¬ riage, had borne inheritance into stran- ger- hand s: every answer teemed with blank desolation—every information signed of fate. Ruin marked the noble fiouse of Pembroke: each gallant son of the brave guardian of his youth, had dropped childless into the grave:—and Robert de Vere, earl of Oxford, the lord great ehamberlain of England, had yielded up his honours to his son Hugh : — and Hugh de Albinie, another of his cotem poraries, had paid the great debt entailed on all flesh : and John Fitzalan, in right of his mother, Isabel, sister of the
the said Hugh, held the rich possessions, and earldom of Arundel. Once, and only once, he questioned of the ill-fated De Burgh : but though his bitter enemy, Ranulph earl of Ches¬ ter, had long since died at Wallingford Castle, still was the fate of De Burgh involved in misty darkness : it was a subject, prohibited in the courtly circle —-a subject, which all feared to touch upon. Henry de Bathe, filled the high dignity of justiciary of England; and however fickle and yielding was the mind and disposition of the king, ht ever maintained an imperious silence, аь to the fate of his once powerful favourite. The death of the earl of Kent was suspected by many; his incarceration, by more: certain it was, he was close hidden from the eyes and the knowledgt of men; but whether self-banished, 01 whether by arbitrary coercion, was, a> his very being, left to speculative con¬ jecture:—he had set in tlie horizon oí royal
royal favour ;—and those who remem¬ bered him in the full blaze of his strength, sighed in secret, and wondered, how that blaze eould have been so suddenly ex¬ tinguished. " If like the haughty Leicester/' said the lord de Cantilupe, joining in the lament of the baron of Hanslape, " men might have mourned the spur to re¬ bellion ; men might have mingled pity with blame: but he shrank away with¬ out resistance; he yielded his cheek to the smiter: potent as he was, in arms and in interest, he gave his vast trea¬ sures—deposited with the Knights- Templars—to the insatiate grasp oí power. Surely"—and he sank his voici to the whisper of caution—** the tried servant, and faithful counsellor of" king John, merited a better recompense/' " Man's judgment, formed on the basis of simple conjecture, is ever replete with prejudice and error," observed the baron,
baron, unwilling to join in the implied censure. " My sword, and my life,- belong to my lawful sovereign/' firmlv reioined De Cantilupe, " yet could I wish the downfal of the earl of Kent had never been. 'Tis true, we know not the in¬ ternal springs of human conduct, but severity reflecteth ever on the inflietor." The pause w r as long and unbroken, fbr the baron of Hanslape, for many moments, stood wrapt in moody thought : it w r as the dream of " the days of other years" which lived on memory ; —it was De Burgh, in the zenith of his glory—it was hope, in the first bud of promise, fanning every flight of fancy— De Burgh, whose erroneous report, en¬ sured to him the hand of his worshipped Alice—to himself, the undying enmity of the earl of Chester— De Burgh, the favourite of kings, long lost, almost for¬ gotten, tenanting, perhaps, an obscure
grave ! Sacred to mournful reflection was the
the tear which stood in his eye! It was not his ovvn griefs ; it was the griefs of a persecuted man, which called forth nature's liveliest feeling ;—for sure, pity for another's woe, owns no brighter vir¬ tue, save active benevolence ! " Not in an arm of flesh—not in the smile of princes, be our trust," said the baron. " On high," raising his clasped hands in pious fervour, " and our base be more lasting than earth !" The lord de Cantilupe, was a strict observer, of every fast, and every reli¬ gious festival ; was a zealous stickler for ought appertaining to faith, yet he smiled at the ascetic earnestness of the baron of Hanslape*, conceiving him fitter fashion¬ ed to the amice than the sword. " My enthusiasm, has been dearly earned—has been dearly paid for"-—and Hanslape breathed a shuddering sigh— " perchance, it savoureth not of the sol¬ dier's fitful calling; but true zeal, my lord, owneth no fixed vocation/ 1 And then,
then, to check, the half framed, half uttered apology, " If not of the earl of Kent," he pursued, " I pray you, some light, on the earl of Kent's family ?" " I know nought of the earl of Kent's family," said the baron de Cantilupe, " save, that his countess has long so¬ journed at his castle of Hafeid, and that his daughter, the lady Margaret, is wed¬ ded to De Clare of Gloucester." " De Clare of Gloucester, the rebel partizan of De Montford?" asked the wondering Hanslape. " Aye, my lord, the same ; and the weightiest charge alleged against the royal Henry, is the suspected assassina¬ tion of the earl her father." The baron grasped the hilt of his sword; his eye flashed the indignation of his feelings.—" On my troth," he ex¬ claimed, " but these are strange disor¬ dered times ! fiery signs, and wonders în the heavens, may well augur awful im¬ port upon earth, when the one true sun, shineth
shineth but on men's backslidings ! (с) But what saith our liege the king?" " Henry casts the imputation back into their teeth," replied De Cantilupe. " 'Tis for us to stamp, by force of arms, the conviction of his innocence." " And we will stamp the conviction, at the peril of life," pronounced Hans¬ lape : " with God's good favour, we will thrust the foul lie back into their traitor throats !" " Aye, like unto this, our conquest of Nottingham/' observed the lord de Cantilupe. " Marry, but we will follow up the game, and brew hot work for pastime! Prince Edward, vows ven¬ geance on the Londoners, for their rank insult to the queen, when shooting London Bridge; and every mother's son, in this our sworn league, will back him in his darings " " Shame and ruin be their inherit¬ ance; remorse, antl abject despair, the harvest of all their midnight plottings !" exclaimed
exclaimed the baron of Hanslape. " May the cry, of those they have widowed—of those they have orphaned, rise up to the judgment-seat! May woe, accumulated woe ----- " He ceased ; he grasped tight at his side; for the sudden pang at his heart, in the remembered image of his own son, cut short his blighting ana¬ thema. * e God—God forgive them !" he feebly concluded, w All who breathe, are dead in trespass and sin ; and laden as we are~and lost as we are—dare we mem ire mercy, or limit grace !"
CHAP-
CHAPTER VIII.
Wa*. ever book, containing such vile matter, So fairly bound ? Oh, that deceit should dwell Iu such a gorgeous palace ! Shakespeare. Not even the hich anointing hand o? Heaven, Can authorize oppression, give a law For lawless pow'r, wed faith to violation, On reason build misrule, or justly bind Allegiance to injustice. Brooke. It was a bright and beamy morning which rose upon the tranqtiil moonshine of the preceding night, yet did Hubert quit his hard couch, with a spirit far from calm, and with a mind, wofully warring against ought of peace. Like unto the foregoing, the hours of day passed in watching and conjecture, tar¬ rying the promised appearance of De Maudit, and wrestling down the anxious throes,
throes, which suspense so cruelly quick¬ ens : his word was pledged not to quit the sanctuary of St. Margaret; and he repaired to the chapel, and he joined in the nocturn service, with more than his accustomed zeal ; he recalled the promised mercy vouchsafed to the sore laden, and he cast his griefs and his burden, at the foot of the blessed emblem of a Saviour's martyrdom ! It was at the foot of the üke anchor of our faith and of our hope, that in storm, and in mystery, he had been received into the ealm shelter of peace and benevolence; that his cries had been hushed on the warm bosom of affection, and liis safety and his princi¬ ples, tended with fostering love !' It was to pray for that earthly benefactor- it was to strive for that earthly benefac¬ tor—it was to pay back some of the mighty debt of his gratitude, that he now bent in fervent piety, humbled to the dust, covered with the seif-strewitig ashes of humility—pouring out his whole
whole spirit at the footstool of grace, and supplicating aid and merey on all his lowly efforts. As he rose from his knees, he met the dark eyes of one of the brethren stead¬ fastly regarding him :■—and when he dipped in the consecrated font, and when he signed the cross upon his fore¬ head, and when he passed the threshold of the chapel, the same monk was still beside him. " What would you, father?" demand¬ ed Hubert. The monk tokened silence, then led down the same path which De Maudit had sought the preceding evening : he paused not, until he gained the deep shadow of the cypress trees, and then he tarried, until the youth stood at his side. " What would you, father ?" again asked Hubert. "Attention and submission," firmly replied the man of God. * c I come from the
the castle of Kenilworth, and I greet you, from the mouth, of the knight, William de Maudit." " Proceed, I pray you—I tarry here, but at his bidding." " He bids you join him in the valley below ; he woukl fain see you, but not at St. Margaret's." " Enough, father," replied Hubert, eager and anxious. " Yield but the clue, and then I go." " Not until night thickens," said the monk ; " not until darkness mingles friend and foe. Rest here, my son, and when the last glow fades in the west, I will seek, and give you counsel." " Father," urged Hubert, but the monk was gone : and though he hurried after him, and pressed through the inter¬ lacing cypress, he caught but the glimpse of his receding figure. He shrunk back ; he glanced around, with fear and wonder. " Strange," he mused, " tliat I should be thus hemmed in with mystery —that
—that I should thus live the dupe of my ow r n heart ! William, William, thou wouldst cozen me of my better self; thou wouldst lure me on with shadows, and muffle every spring of my own judgment Γ Wild and complex were the images which crowded upon his fancy, were the anticipations of the coming hour: he watched the slow advance of night ; he listened, to catch in echo the very " spirit of a sound ;" but no human step was stirring; nought broke upon his ear, save the lone Cť Nightingale, tinit on the Ы )niu\ bpiu\, W .able» at evt, when .dl the woo.Is aie btill." Nature was hushed to rest—all, all, save man ! man, the busy carver of his own woe ; the unquiet tenant of a lanel of peace ; the restless renegade to all of or¬ der ! He dwelt upon the actions of De J baudit, upon the words of De Maudit, until curdling horror iced his very life» vol, ш. L blood—
blood— There is a warring devil xeitkirt me ! Ah ! eould it bear the form—the angel form of Ingelriea? Could it give lie to such a masterpiece ? " Too f tie," he mused, " hell tangleth with flowery folds, else might man es¬ cape, and Satan's reign be impotent" The last streak of lingering <dorv had died in the west, and the whole face of the heavens had put on one sombre li¬ very, still, with slow and measured tiead, did Hubert continue to pace the cvprcss- walk. He feared, in returning to the solitude of his own cell, to quit the ap¬ pointed spot of rendezvous; for wound to the utmost stretch of desperation, ht determined to court his destiny, and tarry though until morning ; but soon did he hear a light í bot í al I ; and then, the rustling sound of parting branches, and then a quickened re piration at his side. " I am here, at ил post/ said Hubert, tirmly. * k And
" And I, true as fate/' softly respond¬ ed the monk. " Come on, my son, and 1 will give you passage, through the low poster«, opening from the garden/' " And what then?" asked Hubert " Why then, I will yield you to э fitter guide, and may God's grace t^nd on VOU f " I would learn furl lu τ," said Hubert, pausing; "though green in yearn I would shun the pitiiill." " Do you fear/" sternly demanded the Canon. " Fear '" echoed the v oui h. k * Fatlìt ì , шу soul is as frtv from fi.»ar, as mv heart from subtilty—I would ever move in open day, and dar even malice to can my actions." " Know you not," asked the monk, 4 that in this restless fitful world, there are times and seasons, when virtue must stoop to secrecy ?—when the best and the bravest of human motives, must 4jek the covert of caution ?" L 2 ·* The
" The best and the bravest/' repeated the astounded Hubert " Jesu Maria ' can the motives, can the ..etions, of Wil¬ liam de Maudit- —of the partizans of William de Maudit — find favour in a member of the church ? Can the venom have spread so far ?—can the eoutdgion Is tve poisoned the true spint of holi¬ ness?*' " Wlio ha.- siiťl so?" a^ked the friar a:tfollv veering from the charge, Hu- Ikrt stood confinmded. ** Young тип/' l.e pursued, rallv ing in tiie seeming dis. comíitur^ oť the youtii, " your word*- favour of rashness. Know vou not, the spirit of peace dwelleth ever in the thnreh; and that we, her lowly mem- Ik rs, mourn, and weep, and pray, for the wilful disorders of a Lille» world ?" ** I know that the heart is hid in ma- ι \- folds/ 5 said Hubert» firmly. " If I Lave erred, lather, 1 cry \onr pardon : and then he spoke no more, until the\ lad gained the postern. Thi
The monk applied the key, yet still helingered in seeming indecision,—"We part on the instant, my son," he pro¬ nounced; " perchance for ever. Should I lea ven will youto the crooked ways and by-paths of policy, know, that I have shriven the conscience of Simon de Mont ford ; and, that in the balance, Simon de Montford may be found less wanting, than many, who enrol them- -»olves, beneath the banner of Henrv Plantagenet. ' Hubert would have replied, but the gate was thrown open, and a stranger pressed to the entrance. A íuw short sentences passed in a kind of whisper, and then lu* felt himself hurried forward, and for some considerable distance, speed and silence wer*· alike observed. " Lead you to the castle of Kenil¬ worth ?" demanded Hubert, pausing ab¬ ruptly, and struggling for freedom. ** Aye, to the castle of Kenilworth/ replied the guide. e Come on. 1 pr*y, L ?» for
for sir William de Maudit lacketh your presence, far 'more than I lack my sup¬ per." " Sir William de Maudit," repeated Hubert, and the name seemed to curb the rising impatience of his feelings. He said no more; he yielded unresist¬ ing ; he heard the measured tread of sentinels, the exchange of watchwords, the rattling of chains, the lowering of the drawbridge :—and when, from dark¬ ness he burst into light, when his daz¬ zled eyes admitted perception, he found himself in a large square chamber, hung with vivid tapestry, and bedight with the gay and silken trappings of splen¬ dour. Lights flamed in massive scon¬ ces; and an open virginal, scattered flowers, and half finished sketches of embroidery, u Spoke it the h«tunt oflddy bright ; Bjr nwm-ámy. and by even-fyht, To train the dirk »nd witching eye, In all of Cupid'» mystery." He
He stood in the midst, gazing around, in doubt and wonder. " Strange," he exclaimed, and then he turned, to seek the door, eager for explanation. At the instant, the door flew open, and the same vision of heavenly beauty, which in the chase of Kenilworth, had broke upon his dazzled sight, glided, with the light and noiseless grace of a hamadryad, into the chamber ! Bashful and beamy, half timid, half advancing, she paused and blushed ! A tight vest of sable velvet, contrasted the snow of her arms and bosom; her taper waist was zoned with rich gems; and her raven tresses, filleted with wreaths of costly pearls ! " The friend of sir William de Mau¬ dit !" exclaimed the lady Ingelriea; " the bold knight, vvho yester-morn, defied our sovereign rule !" Hubert only bow¬ ed. " Nay, nay, sir knight, we yield not the palm so easy. Know you not" archly and gaily;—for hers was the L 4 power
power to speak the random thought— hers was the age, " When youth and graver womanhood divide The lovely prize, and childhood's playful lightnebs, Lurks in the sportive snoule; beams iti the eye's young brightness.*' " Know you not, the lion oft is held by silken chain ?" " Aye, lady, but the chain must fetter more than the lion's strength." He met her eye as he spoke ; and her eye, and her smile, were so artless, and so enquir¬ ing, that to doubt her innocence was wellnigh sacrilege. "Mean you his heart?" she softly .asked. "If so, sir knight, perchance we may weave a mesh for that." "I mean his judgment, lady; his principles of right ; his early, his legiti¬ mate bias." · " Gramercy !" and she started back in moek terror, " you wielel a phalanx too strong for mortal woman ! But more of this anon. I find you hid here, in my
my secret bower ; and if you be a true and loyal knight, and if you crave for ought of lady's grace, expound the seeming riddle/' Hubert stood con¬ founded. " Expound, sir knight, I pray you : yet if it so please, you are welcome thus to Kenihvorth !" And as she spoke, she looked, and laughed, and courtesied, with such playful grace, that ought save admiration slumbered. Momentary was the lapse of reason. Hubert turned aside his eyes, and the mist faded; he saw each brilliant tint darken into deformity ; he traced the serpent trail, and beauty's painted fknv- ers muffled no more the chasm ; he wrestled with the bitterness within ; he struggled down the pungent pang which rose almost to choking. Could it be William, who had thus trapped him in a toil so hateful? could it be William, who playing on his warm heart, had snared him into the power of his hated foe ? Dire was the conviction, yet what L 5 else
else to guess—what else to credit ! A- ghast and horror-struck, he stood, every pulse throbbing, every feeling racked; and when again, the siren-voice of In¬ gelriea, like sweetest music, sued for ex¬ planation, he started back into himself, and with a cold proud bend, exclaimed. " 'Tis De Maudit must expound : why I am here, lady, he best can tell" " To sir William de Maudit then be our thanks/' said the maiden. " I vvould he were here to claim them !" "Not here—not at Kenilworth ! why then am I summoned from the convent of St. Margaret ?" " 'Tis De Maudit must expound"— archly and playfully—" why you an here, he best ran tell" " Lady/' and Hubert spoke with all the energy of* strong emotion, " if you knew the heart, the feelings of your victim, you would shew merey." " I vvould be all merey," lisped the fair ingelriea iC Come, confess, sii knight ;
knight : cast your cause on my promised mercy, and tell me, what brings you to Kenilworth, in stealth, in darkness, and in secrecy, when I would have ushered you m at the great gate, and hailed you, and welcomed you, in broad day ?" " On my soul, lady/' eagerly rejoined Hubert, " I am here, beneath the roof of the earl of Leicester, at the believed instigation of William de Maudit As the dying man elingeth to the faintest token of grace"—and he placed his spread hand upon his breast—" so am I here, perchance fbr the last time, to have parleyed with the sworn friend of my infancy/' si Strange !" and the lady Ingelriea placed her taper finger on her white forehead ; then, starting from her musing attituele, shaking back the luxuriant ringlets of her glossy hair, and raising her sunny eyes in soft enquiry, " Why do I meet you here, in this my chosen bower," she asked " hung with the work L 6 of
of my own maidens, and surrounded by spindles, looms, and half-formed flowers. when all, and every part of the castle, had been better fitting ? Xa\, sir knight," antl .she gazed steadfastly on his varying features, " but for the chance encounter of yester-morning, this intru¬ sion, might impeach more than curi¬ osity." Huberts very temples crimsoned, with stinging vexation, antl outraged pride.—" Then, lady, am I indebtítl to the chance encounter of vester- morning' —■and he looked as cold as he felt. " Be the recognition, a passport to the halls of Kenilworth/' eagerly resinned Ingelriea, as with confiding frankness. she held forth her ivory hand. *· 'Tis true, the earl of Leicester has left us fbr a fitter duty; buttile countess of Lei¬ eester, will greet the prized friend of sir William de Maudit/* Hubert stepped fearfully back ; he- had touched the fair hand—he had bow¬ ed
vd upon the fair hand : but the touch, how cold ! the courtesv, a colder cere- mony î —" Lady," he said, relinquishing i\ prize which thousands pined for, '"rim* 4 rarrieth no man's bidding :—that I a here, was on the work of life or death :-~ to tarry here, would be worse than death to mv own life. M v mission was wifh Willbm de Maudit: if he no longer so¬ journ at Kenilworth, I must away to Hanslape/' A » he spoke, he moved tovvards the (UK>\\ but v i r h the agile bound of a voung fawn, as Miundle^s diid as graceful, the lidy liigthiea stepped before him. Prrhajis, it was the novelty of refusal, which quickened the desire of conquest in her vain heart; certain it is, she felt h.r potent power defied, and she rallied to her aid, all the smiles, the blandish¬ ments, and the witchery, which hereto¬ fore had snared her victims.-—" Here, be our power imperative, sir knight/' half playful, half reproachful ; then, unclasp- "4Í
ing the golden chain, which hung upon her own fair bosom, and casting it grace¬ fully o'er his neck : " Thus/' she said, " ever light and easy, be our thraldom !" In an age of chivalry ; an age, as when we write; an age, when love and war were as the master-springs to manly ac¬ tion, resistance to the sway of beauty was as a heinous crime against all boun- den order: vet diel Hubert, feel no flut- ter at his heart, no wildly throbbing pulse, no combating· emotion. Tht lady Ingelriea, in forni and feature 1 , wa-* more of hea veb than utrth' not tht brightest houri oť a Mahometan's paia- dise-— not the fabled queen of love, in her Idalian groves, environed by her dove«- and her graces, and zoned in her celes¬ tiali eestus, could be more rare, more matchless ! but like unto Ulysses, deaf¬ ening his ear to the music of the sirens, Hubert blinded his eyes to her witch¬ ery ; or rather, the peerless casket was as nought, when contrasted with the vain
vain and wily spirit within. He beheld in her, the ruin of his friend's peace, the corrupter of his friend's probity, anel ad¬ miration gave place to distrust and scorn ; yet did policy veil his feelings, and w ith a grace, scarce inferior to her own, gently disengaging himself from the gorgeous trammel, he bowed his knee, and placed it at her feet. " Lady/' he said, " I have been reared by a Christian guide, in whom duty ne¬ ver yet vielded to inclination : in dark- ness and mystery, it was duty which led me to the castle of Kenilworth ; and it is duty, which without the rest of a single hour, impels me back to the castle of Hanslape." " And what," asked the lady Ingelriea, " shall be said to sir William de Maudit, when with to-morrow's sun, he seeks you in the cloister of the black canons ?" il Let them tell him/' replied Hubert, proudly, i; even friendship may be taxed too high, William de Maudit, lady, is the
the dupe of subtle policy ; or, William de Maudît, has lived to falsi fv his ovvn word." He rose as he spoke, and he looked the impatience he could not utter. " And who/' demanded the maiden. " shall bear the message to sir William iT 4 de Maudit?" " Be it the oifice of the w ily monk/ quick rejoined Hubert " who under ťahe pretence 1 , beguiled me hither." Ingelriea rallied her sweetest smile,— " I woukl award the holy father, nought» save thank*-/* she softly -slid * and then she ceased, and b'u^hod. The implied compliment could not be misconstrued—-Hubert bowed, although impatience h< iühuned almost to a^onv —" Time rlittetb. on rapid pinion/' he ищеек ** Ladv, I am not the first, who martyrs inclination to duty/ 4 And then again he motioned to withdraw, and then again was he withheld, by the arch policy of his lovely jailer. ,% Our
" Our dutv, in the stead of the noble host, rises, sir knight, as imperative as your ovvn. It is not meet, to quit the castle of Kenilworth, without proving the hospitality of the lordly Leicester." The start of Hubert was wellnigh palsied.—" Ladv," he exclaimed, in the rash impulse of the moment, " I would not break the bread of the earl of Lei- coster, to save myself from starving." ** And what/' asked Ingelriea, "has the earl of Leicester done, to despite the friend of sir William de Maudit?" Hubert recovered himself on the in¬ stant; he raised his eyes to her face, anxious to decipher beyond her words: but hers was a heart, which was indeed hid in many folds; a heart whose subtle workings, whose intricate movements, dt iteci all of human penetration. Long did she pause, as though tarrying his re¬ ply; and then, with well assumed won¬ der at his silence, " I woidd learn/' she co!iťmu''d, * as the ward of the earl of Leicester,
Leicester, why the bread of the earl of Leicester, should be converted into the bane, rather than the staff of man's life ?" " Such are the contrarieties in na¬ ture." firmlj' observed Hubert, " that nutriment, and subtle poison, oft gender in the same aliment, dealing out health and death from the one source. Lady, the bread of the earl of Leicester, may be sweet to the perverted palate of Wil¬ liam tie Maudit; but the bread of rin¬ cari of Leicester, to the grateful de¬ pendant of the b iron of Hanslape, would be more bitter than gall." A slight shade passed over the fair cheek of the inquisitor, like the sun, dip¬ ping behind a silver cloud, then bursting forth with renovated glory ; for in a short space, brief almost as thought, were the spells, vma the charms, and the magic graces, comprised in the name of woman, summoned to her purpose: she lient her beautiful eyes on the ground, imd struggling down the wildly flutter¬ ing
ing emotion of her bosom, ír What may be said," she softly asked, " if the ward of the earl of Leicester, confess herself, the actor, and the plotter, of the present drama ? Hear me, sir Hubert—for my heart tells me, 'tis the same sir Hubert, in whose praise I have so often listened : nay, that very scar"—glancing timidly at his forehead—" lives the testimony of infant heroism ! Tell me, sir Hubert, in expunging the seeming trespass of sir William de Maudit, heap I, on my own head, an offence too vast for par¬ don ?" " Vou —you, lady !" yielding to the wild transport of his feelings, and for¬ getting all, in the indemnity of his youth's companion. " Oh no ! 'tis thanks, Ί /ш blessings, I would pour forth ! De Maudit lives, cleansed from the foul stain of falsehood ! De Maudit abets not in the ruin of his friend!" " How, ruin ?" asked the wily Ingel¬ riea. *· On my faith, you are now as free,
free, as though in the castle of Hans¬ lape !" " Of De Maudit— of De Maudit, alone, lady," anxious and eager. " I beseech you, tell me, journeyeth he ior a brief season ? or tarry etl·, he now at Kenilworth ?" " Sir William de Maudit," replied In¬ geirica, " quitted Kenilworth, at day- dawn, for the castle of Hafeld. It was not caprice, neither was it pleasure, which called him hence: ere departure, he named the expecting friend, awaiting him in the monasterv of St. Margaret ; and with the aid of a spiritual father, under tlie belief— т Л· ------" Hhe ceas¬ ed, and bent her blushing face; and tlie false tear, which stood in her eye, was as morn's brightest gem on the opening rose-bud. "I-— f —"sheresumed, combat- ing the rising swell of sensibility, ami assuming all tlie frankness of ingenuous nature—** I would needs have lured you hither; and in lieu of the lenten fare
fare of the canons of St Margaret, have tempted, with the festive-board, and wassail-cup, of the earl of Leicester." if Laoy, the lenten fare of the canons of St. Margaret/' rejoined Hubert, "sea¬ soned with self-satisfaction, is better fit¬ ting to health, than all which pampered greatness can offer. Not heaven and hell are moie opposite, than are my sen¬ timents, and the, sentiments of the earl of Leicester." "Alack 1 that prejudice should har¬ lot, r İn a breast so noble!" and the light flutter of the lady Ingelricas sigh, was as the spicy breath of the south : but Hubert heeded not thai sigh ; nei¬ ther, did he heed, the soft sud thrilling glance of her full-orbed eye. It was not the fair image of the gentle Isabel, radiant in innocence and truth, which armed him against her witchery ; it was the suspicion of her faith, it was the conviction of her art, which blunted the spell of her potent beauty. " The earl of
of Leicester," she replied, after the hesi¬ tation of a moment, " is a true patriot ; and the love of country, should ever be, the firmest link in the chain of association/* " I would alone of Dé Maudit," said Hubert, striving to wave ought of party disquisition. " Lady, on the speed of the wind, I would follow De Maudit to the castle of Hafeld." " To the castle of Hafeld !" repeated Ingelriea tf Know you not, sir Hu¬ bert, peril threatens the partizan of Henry Plantagenet ? ' ·' 1 care not, though it threatened life/' eagerly responded the youth. " Lady, I would wage more than life on the cause I advocate " " Not to-night—I pray )ou, not "ί darkness," urged Ingelriea : " tarry, un¬ til day break in the east ; until------" 44 Not here/' interrupting her — "I would not tarry here, under the roof of the earl of Leicester, for a king s ran¬ som ! Rather would I herd with the beasts
beasts of the field—rather, vvould I stretch me on the wet grass, and shiver beneath the blast of heaven !" " And will vou be too proud," re- proachfully questioned Ingelriea, start¬ ing from the trance of deep thought " to accept an indemnity from harm ? Will you submit yourself to a guide, and receive, at my hands, the passport of security ?" " Aye, lady,"—and he spoke with the fervour of a warm heart— iC and your guerdon be my gratitude !" " I crave nought else/" timidly whis¬ pered the maid; " your gratitude, sir Hubert, and the approval of my ovvn conscience/' She extended her soft white hand as she .spoke; and as he bent his knee, and as he bowed his lip upon it with the smile ot angel inno¬ cence, she repeated, " My guerdon be your gratitude." " Lady, it shall die with me," so¬ lemnly pronounced Hubert. " Speed me
me to the ear of William de Maudit, and nightly be your name numbered in my prayers." " In one short hour"—-and the lady Ingelriea lingered at the door—" be the venture, ever so hazardous, still will 1 toil out the promised guerdon :—in one short hour," she repeated, " prepare ye, sir Hubert, to depart from Kenihvorth/' " That one hour will be as ten to me," thought Hubert, as, like a vision of light, she glided from the chamber; " that one hour, passed beneath the roof of the rebel Leicester, will be, as a chastening scourge, to my proud and soaring spirit" But during that one prescribed hour, the reflections of our hero, were of a strange, and wild, and complex tissue- were of an aspect, which existing eir- cumstauecs, could neither warrant or resolve : it was dejection, almost to me- lancholy; it was grief, almost to weep¬ ing, which pressed upon his heart, and cramped
cramped every glowing impulse of his nature. He had taken a light from one of the sconces, and he had followed the rich and vivid efforts of the needle, until intense interest had rivetted every feel¬ ing. It was not, as the work of the lady Ingelriea;—it was the chaste consistency, the associating link, which living in every distinct group of the tapestry, spoke it the labour of historic delinea¬ tion. Often, had he watched, the fairy ringers of Isabel, scattering flowers, and tracing wild forms, and picturesque va¬ rieties; but never, until now,, had he gifted the needle, with the artist's magic power! The groups of figures, seemed to move, to breathe, to grow into life, as his eyes wandered over them ; the ex¬ pressions of soul, the warring struggles of passion, speaking in every outline: and each group, was but the continua¬ tion of one woe-fraught story—gradually unreaving the tissue, and recording the vol. iii. m triumph,
triumph, and the fall, of luiman great¬ ness. He saw a man, rich in youth, gifted in all of youth's prerogative, robed in the splendid ermine of nobility, and invested in all of earthly power: he seemed as the conqueror of kingdoms ; for he had snatched a jewelled crown from contending party, and he had placed that jewelled crown on an infant brow. The next group, was the same beardless blushing boy, mounted cm a throne, and giving law to thousands; his foot pressed on a couchant lion ; and his right hand lay on the shoulder oí the same noble, whose counsel, and whose strength, had made his seat so firm, and his power so ample ! Another change, and behold the fawning syco¬ phancy of man :—a sun, in his meridian, tmobscured by a single cloud, and shin¬ ing, almost to dazzling! Countless, as the sand upon the sea-girt shore, was the mighty phalanx uf summer-friends: for
for the same noble, mounted on the flowery pinnacle of fortune, and wield¬ ing the sword and the scales of justice, lived in the smile and the favour of his king! Another change, and mark the instability of all things earthly;—a sun, half obscured ! The noble, shaken from his high station ; his lofty crest, half bent; the smiles of the myriad, con¬ verted into frowns; the countenance of the monarch, turned against him. An¬ other, and the rude blast of adversity, had scattered all of fortune's blossoms f Reviled, hooted, laden with contumely and scorn, one arm—and only one arm, propped midst the rum : it was the arm of a Knight-Templar—and the firm and faithful arm, upheld tlie outraged noble, in all his waning glory. Quick, as in the shifting scene of a drama, might next be traced, the selfsame noble, separated from the friendly Templar, dragged from the sanctuary of the church, and strapped on a mean and sorry horse; M 2 İÎİ5
his cheek, wan unto death ; his forehead, thick scattered with drops of mortal anguish: a whole world, conspiring to crush and to wound ; yet integrity, shin¬ ing around him like light, and conscious honottr, defying every taunt of degra¬ dation. The last change, spoke deso¬ lation and utter ruin í —a sun, totally eclipsed; a tree, lopped of all its branch¬ es ; its sapless base, thick scattered with defaced and torn ensignias ; the badges of knighthood, disgraced; the spurs, turned; the pennon, inverted; the sword, the mantle, the cap, and the earľs co¬ ronet muffled, and half hid in dust. It w r as Fate's deadly mildew which hung upon the colouring; for it was dim and sombre as the grave, and not one sign of animate nature marked the outline ; .__it was an epitome of the ruin of a world »—it was, as when the waters of the deluge shrank away at the mandate of the Eternal, leaving all of earth, åe« spoiled of every trace of breathing man * Hubert
Hubert felt the desolation of the pic¬ ture ; he relinquished the light, and he stood, with folded arms, gazing on the fallen honours of human grandeur, until Leicester, and the castle of Kenilworth, and William de Maudit, alike faded from remembrance ; until every feeling, converging in the contemplation, centred alone^ in the chequered fortunes of the noble. " Mark you the gratitude of Henry Plantagenet?" asked a voice. He start¬ ed, and turning, beheld the lady Ingel- rica, attentively observing him. " In the vicissitudes of the earl of Kent," she pursued, " we may read the sandy foun¬ dation of a monarch's favour. Ah ! that faith should meet such a recompense !~~ that zeal, and long-tried service, should be so repaid ! Know you, sir Hubert"— and she drew close beside him— " a vice, so stinging as ingratitude; a crime, so monstrous, twixt man and man ?" * e Methinks, lady, "said Hubert, (i yom m 3 needle,
needle, as your fancy, has been highly wrought." "Notso," eagerly rejoined the maiden. " List to me, sir Hubert, and he your heart—not vour urei u dice— m v suret v. Who placed the crown upon the baby brow of Henry? Who upheld him in every threatened ill? Who steered his frail bark, through the shoals and the shallows of contending party? Who sheltered him, midst each world-rocking tempest? It was his father's friend—it was his father's counsellor—it was tiie earl of Kent! And where is the earl oi Kent, now ?" As she spoke, she turned her eyes to the last mournful sketch on the tapestry, to the symbol of ruin, her needle had wrought. ** Lost—gone— passed away," she aniculated: "ifin heaven, most blessed f if still a sojourner of earth, tenanting, perchance, a damp and cheerless dungeon Г *· Know you not, whether in life or death ?" questioned Hubert, yielding his ear
ear and his interest to the woe-fraught story. " I know nought, save mystery and Norrow/' rejoined the lady Ingelriea. íť In prosperity, the earl of Kent hatl many friends: for there are friends of a season, sir Hubert—friends, like unto the gilded butterfly, basking in the sunny rays of Fortune's favour, and scudding beneath the shower of her frown." " And that Templar/' said Hubert, his whole heart anchored on the mourn¬ ful tradition. * ť That pious man—that lowly dis¬ ciple of the order of Zion— that uniteti soldier and priest," replied the lady In¬ gelriea, 4i was the friend of adversity; was the defender, the champion of the earl of Kent, midst every stress of his disastrous fortune! Alone, did he stem the royal frown; boldly did he advocate tbi' cause of outraged greatness ; stat meh л- îs the firm rock, breasting the buffet Vf 4 oí
of the tempest did he defeat every per¬ jured accusation, did he defy the lie of biting malice, and maintain the un- blenched honour of his violated fame; ¿id he-^— w 4 " Bless him, Heaven Г' ejaculated Hu¬ bert, scarce conscious of what he uttered. The lady Ingelriea snatched his hand; deeper roses bloomed upon her cheeks ; brighter fires kindled in her eyes; hers was the transport of a heart, exulting in imagined victory.—" You feel—you pity —you advocate the cause of Dé Burgh !" she exclaimed ; " you bless the Tem¬ plar ; you------" She ceased, for a bugle sounded in the court-yard below. " 'Tis the signal,'* she pursued ; " 'tis the ap¬ pointed guide. Trust in me, sir Hu- bert, w leading to the door—"and be my guerdon your gratitude?
CHAP.
CHAPTER IX. When those whom Heaven distinguishes o'er millions, And show'rs profusely powV and splendour on them, Whate'er th' expanded heart can wish; when they, Accepting the reward, neglect the duty, Or, worse, pervert those gifts to deeds of ruin, Is there a wretcli they rule so base as they ? Guilty, at once, of sacrilege to Heaven, And of perfidious robbery to man! Mallet. Twice had the melancholy hourglass ran its last sand, since the portal of Ke¬ nilworth closed upon Hubert and his stranger guide, yet still were they toil¬ ing amidst heath-brambles and brush¬ wood, their track, unbeaten; their way, perilous ; the country around, lone even to desolation ; unvaried by the sign of human habitation ; unenriched by ought of human industry : no ripe and wavy corn, to tempt the sickle, or fan, in many m 5 a golden
a golden dream of coming harvest, the husbandman's hopt*s: alternately tangled in dark and mazy woods, or dismount¬ ing, to lead through the deep and treacherou -ч umra<v The reign oí anar¬ chy and turmoil tukeiiinl in the caution which marked the movement* of tht* guide; lie &jmke but seldom, and whet? he diu ^|ieak, it wa« in an under-tom, as though, dunder lurked ппнч*и, anil hazard grew iu every butze w hieb gathered, HuIictî 1чх<»шсч] nought of fear, but Hubert too movr?! on in s, lence, his mind оссиркч) hv pa>t and present or vainly resolving the im*. terious colour of his emfxtxs} mm ac¬ quitting De Maudit, în tla· acknow¬ ledgment of the lady IngeJriea. <*!*! now, wondering at the strangt* diusìtn. which blinded him to her at t ìlice , — iui that her transcendent beauty was l^nt io the cause she advocated, that aii lit r potent spells, aimed but at the ent lind- ment of new subsidies and new а!кеч spokt
spoke in every glance of her sunny eyes, in every sigh she heaved, in every word she tittered : like unto the death-doom¬ ing basilisk, she had coiled around the heart of her victim ; she had fascinateti him, even to the sacrifice of every good resolve, to the martyrdom of every filial duty, fettering his judgment, and fa¬ shioning him to her own insidious pur¬ pose. "Alas" mused Hubert, "on earth, hjw may our prime good become our weightiest ill * how may the long years ot future life, he coloured bv the die «4* a single moment' Hapless William' woman, destined, thoolace, the honeyed drop* m this our bitter cup, has dashed thy cup, with bitter, worse than gall/ 1 Tokens of the birth of day spoke in many a crimson streak, and light clouds of'gold and purple, floating in the eastern sky» and gradually spreading, burnished the whole Une ot the horizon, with opening ii lory, ere they emerged front M lì the
the thick and almost impervious wood in which they had long wandered: a юпе and barren heath lay before them ; and then again, fresh woods, and fresh wildernesses, hemmed in the prospect " A few more efforts, and next, for a flagon, and a guard-bed," said the guide. " By the rood, but rest will be meet, after our midnight toil !" " Draw we nigh to the eastle of Ha¬ feid ?" asked Hubert. " Aye, sir knight, nigher than a falcon- flight : and many a brave spirit mounts watch on the castle-battlements." " Perchance, a fastness of strength/* observed Hubert " Too strong, for tyranny to conquer. too weak, for tyranny to hold '" rejoined the guíele. " Tis a fastness, which the esrl of Kent, yielded up to the cormo¬ rant grasp of Harry Plantagenet/' " And now?" said Hub«!, eagerly. " Now/* and the stranger smiled sig- nifieantlv.
nificantly, ** it owns a governor, called William de Maudit." Hubert shuddered, yet he wrestled with his feelings, and checked tiie ex¬ clamation, mounting to his lips. " We have earned it, and we hold it, 11 pursued the guide, heedless of the emo¬ tion of his companion ; " and soon—or perish man's boasted power—will De Burgh's forfeit castles, of Blanch 5 and Skenefreth, and Grossmount, be added to our list of conquest Γ " Fight you for revenge? or, fight you for justice?" demanded Hubert, willing to prove him. " For justice, comprised in our charter of rights," firmly replied the stranger : ťí revenge, sir knight, would but blacken the cause of liberty." *" Virgin Mother ["ejaculated Hubert, ·' how wofully do we pervert the laws of truth, and shelter ourselves behind the threadbare evasions oí our own subtilty !" #s And Henry Plantagenet," demanded the
the stranger, fiercely, " profanes he not his coronation oath?—tramples he not on the fundamental basis of truth ?— riots he not on the privileges and the freedom of his subjects? Why are the nobles in arms?—why does the blast of defiance, echo throughout the land?" " Because," replied Hubert, firmly» " man, from the first Adam, has ever been the wilful creature of disobedience : it was his pride, which leaguing with the devil, marred his innocence ; it is his pride, which ever gives law to his ovvn actions/' " There is another because, and a stronger because/' said the guide, with a look and a smile of derision—" be¬ cause, Henry Plantagenet, sacrifices the duty of a king to his own inordinate avarice—^eause, he yields his ear and his power, to the minions of his fancy— because, he drains the coffers of his liege people, and lavishes the sunbeams of his favour, on foreigners and strangers— because,
because, he lives at war with his own conscience, and heeds not the threats of a groaning land—because, he heaps in¬ justice, where gratitude alone is clue; and forgetful of the man, whose fervent zeal, and firm loyalty, yielded to his puny grasp, the giant sceptre of Eng¬ land, persecutes the fame, and bans with disgrace and odium, the name and the actions of the earl of Kent : but the fall of the earl of Kent—the mysterious dis¬ appearance of the earl of Kent, leagued with the perversion of his own sacred function, loosens the foundation of his throne, and rouses the fury of the lion, whose duty, was to guard, and hem him in from violence." " Where men crave a cloak for their own mal-practices," thoughtfully re¬ marked Hubert, " the guilt genders in themselves, rather than their chosen pre¬ cedent. The royal Henry may be other than perfect—for all of earth pertains to the fallibility of earth—but his errors, warrant
warrant not the errors of his people ; his trespasses., expunge not the damning crime of treason : dazzled by the rays of his own glory ; deluded by the chicanery and wiles of artful men, he ------" " Hold ľ interrupted the stranger, and the glance of his dark eye, was, as the scathing flash of Heaven's lightning— tť hold, sir knight, nor in a king, white¬ wash the guilt of a humbler man. In¬ gratitude, is a ciying crime against nature ; and not the imperial purple, not the gera-incrusted diadem, can palliate its baseness ; it implicates the feelings, not the reason ; it impeaches the heart, not the judgment. I tell you—and I would speak it before men and before angels—Henry Plantagenet is the plot¬ ter erf his own ruin, is the busy worker of his own overthrow : he pays services, with injuries; faith, with scorn; love, with hatred :—in the person of tbe earl t£ Kent, he casts away the firmest prop of his throne ; in the wrongs of the earl of
of Kent, he arms every legitimate noble against him. We read, in the fallen justiciary, the epitome of our own fate; for he would plunge us all alike into the hell of iffnoniinv. to hang our forfeit honours around the necks of his foreign minions." " And you—who are you ?" demanded Hubert, steadfastly regarding him. " One, who lends his arm and his sword to the cause of justice," proudly responded the stranger; " one, who guides to the castle of Hafeid, from courtesy, not obedient subjection/' " Doubtless, a noble partizan of the earl of Leicester;" and Hubert looked the scorn he felt. " One/' pointedly rejoined the stran¬ ger, " who may yet answer that taunt in the field"—and then he ceased, nor spoke again, until the dark and heavy walls of Hafeid Castle, rose, like a giant pile, in the distance. The breezy morn blew fresh upon the face
face of Hubert, yet did his heart droop with many sorrows, and his spirit sicken at sight of the rebel hold of his deluded friend : it seemed to his jaundiced fancy, as the sepulchre of his honour, as the crying testimony of his disgrace: for there, did De Maudit rear the standard of rebellion, and tangle, the disaffected and unwary, in the subtle web of his own treason; there, unmindful of the precepts of his youth, did he martyr all of early promise, to the goading influ¬ ence of earth-born passion. The little barony of Hafeid, lay scat¬ tered in a sunny vale ; the castle, like unto the guardian of the fold, frowning upon the upland ; embosomed in woods of ages growth, fi\ nked with watch- towers, and close Jk mmed in by a deep and wide moat. It had been a grant of our third Henry, to the then prosperous and favoured earl of Kent: but when prosperity waned, and favour set in storm, Hafeid, with many other fair and rich
rich possessions, had been yielded, as the purchase of a vagrant smile ;—as faint, as brief, as an April sunbeam, was the recorded smile of our third Henry ί Far heavier outrage followed—But 'tis of the castle of Hafeid, we write. The castle of Hafeld then, by stress of arms, quick passed into the hands of the hostile barons:—and when Hubert, and his unknown guide, paused beneath the shadow of its giant walls, the ramparts were close manned, and the banner of defiance waved o'er its battlements.
1l> Jľl j. \ L —
CHAPTER Χ.
Thou art dear to him : Heaven only Vnow- How very dear thou artï "— - ........ ■ "' ■ " ■ " ■■■ • ■■■■líe would fall upon thy neck, And weep forgtveness! Colehido-í. The stranger guide, who had led Hu¬ bert from Kenilworth, raised to his lips the gilded bugle which hung at his sword-belt, and ere yet the shrill echo of the blast died in distance, the port¬ cullis was drawn up, the drawbridge lowered, and together they crossed into the courtyard of Hafeid Castle. With¬ in, as without, bore the stem aspect of war; defiance reared its hostile crest, and defence, spoke, in the ramparts, and bastions, and fortified towers, which close hemmed in the fastness. Broad and bright, did the beams of an un¬ clouded
clouded sun, shine on the polished spears, and dazzling helms, of a crowd of warriors ; and nobility of birth, and high bearing spoke, in the marked re- speet, and humble deference, which every where, called forth, the gracious smile, and courteous bend, of the stranger- knight. Hubert followed across the court-yard, and within a kind of guard-room, at the base of one ot' the towers, he was left to solitude and reflection. It was then, that lie owned, and shuddered at his own daring ; that conviction, magnify¬ ing the danger by which he was sur¬ rounded, pictured him the dupe of w rnanS wiles; that writhing beneath the consequences of his own confiding tolly, he looked back, to happiness and to Hanslape, as a dream which had passed away ; that mourning the be¬ reavement of the baron, he execrated the subtlety of the lady Ingeirica, and contrasting her actions, with the open purity
purity and angel innocence of Isabel, blackened her even to the inky die of guilt and perfidy, ** Ä »"iri 4"£i4- сч-ч Ľnfnlir » r»*-i*-l irrví- o/\ XJLH«bt \ L,L, OVA tUítiy , C»1U V 1 - 1 ·* ^V/ rare, in form and feature!" he mused. " Wretehed, wretched William ! thou art the willing slave of one, whose whole soul is plighted to a burning brand ! God help thee, lost one! for nought on earth can rescue/' Sorrowing, almost to weeping, his feelings stung, his passions all in arms, he paced the narrow limit of his prison, marvelling at his fate, and impatient at the bars which held him. Suddenly, the tread of footsteps, and the buzz of voices, roused hİuı to exertion and to fortitude; he looked up; the door was thrown open, and a warrior, cased in burnished steel, stood at the entrance. The height, the size, the movement, spoke De Maudit; yet he yielded not to impulse: more than once, had his warm heart been cast back upon itself; more
more than once, had his advance been slighted; he stood proudly erect, and silent, as though in expectancy. " Bv mv certes," and De Maudit m' * shook back the sable plume, which waving о er his steel cap, half shadowed his features, " I had wagered life on your knowing me midst a thousand ! Dear Hubert, this war-gear, hides, but changes not the nature" Hubert grasped the extended hand, but his heart was too full for utterance. ** I had bargained,'' pursued William, - to have sought you in St. Margaret's cloister: but filte enjoined it counter, and now tell me, by what 'leeromancy, father Andrew passed you on to Ha¬ feld ?" *· Father Andrew," repeated the amazed Hubert—" William, William, this is no season for banter/* " By the rood, 1 speak in sober ear¬ nestness, nay, in sober sadness, if you will have it so," exclaimed De Maudit, " for
<ť for my heart is ill fashioned for banter ! I see you here, piloted by røy lord of Leicester's son, the brave Henry de Montford: 'tis for you then to unriddle the riddle." " That I am here at Hafielď'— and Hubert steadfastly regarded him—" is at the instigation of the lady Ingelriea Fitzparnel : the monk Andrew, is her emissary; Lenry de Montford, her abet¬ tor; I, but her dupe." The smile vanished, and the glow fa¬ ded from the cheeks of De Maudit : it was care ; it was distrust ; it was mad¬ dening ire, which kindled in his eye : he stood in moody thought, his hand raised to his forehead, his lips compres¬ sed, and a mortal frown, fast gathering on his brow. 4ť The emissary- — the abettor —the dupe Γ he repeated. " Hubert, on your soul, bosom not an inference so dubious Learn from me, that heaven's own arch, is not more free, more open, tban
than the actions, and the motives, of the angel you defame !" " Be it even as you wish," said Hu¬ bert, mildly " My errand, William, is on behalf of the baron, your father. I tarried your second coming at St. Mar¬ garet's : that I am here now, is but to bide your bidding." " Nay, nay, dear Hubert, bear with me ;" and De Maudit smothered down the impatience of his feelings. " I would learn, how you quitted St, Margaret's ; and through what capricious chance, you obtained the pilotage of De Mont- ford ?" " The ladj r Ingelriea can explain all," said Hubert, firmly. " But the lady Ingelriea is far distant/' urged De Maudit, " and my heart ill brooks suspense. There are moments, dearest Hubert, when a thought, a doubt, inflicts torture." " I have felt them—I feel them now" emphatically pronounced Hubert vol. in. n "Ah !
ťť Ah ! but to love as I love—to dote as never man doted," rejoined the impe¬ tuous William. *' Hubert — Hubert, you have never loved, or you would not trifle with a lover's torture !" Hubert smothered down a sigh,— " Where love savoureth not of reason," he remarked, "'tis at best madness." " Be it madness—call it madness," pursued William ; " it is a madness, which will abide with me unto death ; a madness------" " What, though the object prove un¬ worthy?" interrupted Hubert, scarcely conscious of what he uttered. The start, the wild agony of De Mau¬ dit, awakened him to the importance of his words. — " Explain —- explain," he gasped out—" If Ingelriea be false, the world and I have done with each other ! If Ingelriea be false ! Holy God !" fcl I did but start a possibility," rejoin¬ ed Hubert, anxious to still the storm lie had unwittingly excited. " If I could mould
mould the heart of this beauteous Ingel¬ riea, I would gift it, with a faith and love, as unerring as your own." " And does lier heart need re-mould¬ ing ?" eagerly questioned William. " Be brief, Hubert ; as well may you trifle with the fires of heaven." " I know nought of her heart :—at best, a woman's heart," and Hubert tried to smile, " isa heterogeneous compound :■ — her heart, may be pure as unsunned snow ; but her actions, William, savour of double dealing." " As how?" and De Maudit scarcely breathed " She lends all her rare powers to the interest of the insidious Leicester," said Hubert ; " she furthers his cause of trea¬ son, to the impeachment of her own discretion." " Discretion" echoed William, and every feature was convulsed. " Think you discretion too strong a term ?" asked Hubert. " Had the lady N 2 Isabel,
Isabel, played the Uke part, in the like subtle and perilous project, what had been a brother's judgment?" De Maudit turned aside his face ; he stood for a moment, silent and confound¬ ed, till recovering himself, and labour¬ ing at excuse, " Isabel was reared in a cloister," he observed ; " Isabel is a child, a mere child, in ought of life and human habit." " God grant she retain the purity of childhood, even when the roses of youth are fled !" exclaimed Hubert, yielding to all the warm energy of his nature. " 1 cry your pardon, dearest William, but I would, that woman, ever retained her own preeminence, in the magic of her artiessness !" " Prejudice trampleth down justice/' said William, bitterly. " Doubtless, the lady Ingelriea—all angel as she is ! as the ward of the earl of Leicester, is other than perfection." ** Doubtless," rejoined Hubert, " the lady
lady Ingelriea, is an agent in the myste¬ rious designs of Providence. The event maj r be salutary, however the medium be bitter. But no more of this war of words. I come not here, to argue the knotty point of female influence;—I come, to win you back to the arms of your father—to point out the fatal ill which tends your backslidings—to im¬ plore you, in the name of all you once ho¬ noured, to forswear the present, and live alone to the past. Search your heart— search your conscience, then tell me, De Maudit, has your sleep been sounder— have your days beon happier, since you wandered from the shelter of Hanslape?" " Happiness," said William, struggling against the load within, " owns no standard, admits uo fixed criterion; it varies its form and colour, with the dis¬ position, arid the heart, in which it har¬ bours." " And, can your disposition, can your heart, find happiness, in a cause, hostile N S to
to honour ?" quickly demanded Hubert ; " can you draw your sword against a father's life, and not feel horror in the deed ?" " Honour is as problematical as hap¬ piness," responded William. " What" —-after the pause of a moment—" though I eye the eagle-flights of Leicester, and pant to link my unfledged spirit to his darings ?—what, though transported by the dauntless hardihood of the gallant Gloucester, 1 track his meteor-blaze, and ape his prowess ?" "Rank—rank traitors !" and Hubert turned away in disdain. " We are all traitors—all, rank trai¬ tors to our ovvn welfare/ 5 feelingly pro¬ nounced William : " not one, who breathes the breath of life ; not one, who crawls 'twixt earth and sky, who is not meet for repentance/' " Repentance f ah, William !" and Hubert, almost sobbing, cast himself upon his neck. It was the firm clasp of
of friendship—it was the encircling fold of early habit—and Hubert forgot, and William forgot, that the hearts, which so wildly throbbed against each other, vvere anchored on opposite causes ! A- like agitated, alike the slaves of strong emotion, it was long, ere the guard- rocm, and the martial ensignias of war, recalled them to the castle of Hafeid, and to existing ill; ere the blessed dream, of infancy and of nature, vanish¬ ed, amidst the mists of inquietude and care. Hubert raised lus head ; he gazed upon his friend, until the yearnings of his heart, spoke in the tears which flooded his eyes; then, suddenly relin¬ quishing his hold, and sliding down be¬ fore him, he clasped the knees of Wil¬ liam, with such wild energy, that life seemed waged in the venture. " Think -—think, 'tis your father," he sobbed out ; " think—think, 'tis his peace, 'tis his sanity, for which I supplicate." William struggled for freedom, but n 4 William
William struggled in vain: his own judgment sided against him: his own nature, despoiled of tyrant'passion, was yielding, and gentle, and full of human kindness; but it was tyrant passion which warred against cotí for mity ; it was the slavery of the heart which held him in iron bonds.—" What crave you ?" he asked, in accents, scarce articulate. " Your return to Hanslape—yrvur re¬ nunciation of a league, which tends to headlong ruin. Know you not, the slumbering lion is awakened — the le¬ thargy of indolence, passed, and gone ť Know you not, the royal Henry, and his son, the warlike Edward, summon to arms ? Have a care fbr the here¬ tofore un blenched honour of your house —that when the besom of retributive justice sweep through the land, tlie name of De Maudit, swell not the list proscribed.'* " Think you, we cannot cope, with Henry's strength, and Henry's prowess ? think
think you, thecoiiquerorof Gaseony, need curry favour of the stripling Edward ? Marry," and William's smile was cut¬ ting irony, " your dependance is of sand, if it rest, on the weathercock king, and the maiden efforts of his heir ! I pray you, a more cogent reason, if you would ensure attention/' " Of your father then, dear William ; your father's blessing ; your father's deathbed peace. We will think no more of king Henry, or of prince Ed¬ ward, or of the earls of Leicester and of Gloucester; we will think—we will talk, but of our own little world at Hanslape." " Ah ! of Hanslape ! of my honoured father ! of happier times !" and De Mau- 4 d iťs heart glowed in his eyes. " Of the season," resumed Hubert, " when there was, but one thought, one wish, among us; when you, and Isabel, and I, wearied with the sports cf the N 5 day,
day, slept sound in the blessing of father Gilbert; when------" " It was a bright, bright season !" in¬ terrupted William, struggling down the pang of remembrance ; " a season, I would purchase back witb life !" " A season, which may yet re-dawn/ 5 said Hubert, mildly ; " at least, my friend, the peace ofthat season/' " Never" emphatically pronounced William: "as well may we crave to live back the years which are gone. Life has but one summer: it rests with ourselves whether that summor yield the harvest of peace ; or whether, tht ¿ccd-tiuK, be choked with the rank tares <ìf inquietude and repining" Hubert teít the truth, the chilling truth, of the like conviction ; but bb aim. was to soften, not to hCJ^\ with a barren, and a sunless prospect.—*' Thew is a medium/' he soothingly observed, " which may yet save the seed from witheiing ; there is a blessed meed, in
in reparation, held out to the sound in heart : the effort, once made — the sacrifice, once accomplished—and each hour, each day, will brighten ; each week, each month, each year, garner up content. Your meditations will be calm ; your reminiscences without passion ; your tears will be of balm, rather than bitterness; you will look to the future ui hope—to the past, as the penitent looks to the scourge, which macerates ihe imperfections of his nature." " And the effort—the sacrifice?** de¬ manded William, starting from profound thought. fc4 To renounce the garbled mesh of treason/* replied Hubert ; " to break from the trammel of the traitor Leicester." ** Ask possibilities—ask my life," said William, vehemently, " and I will lay bare шу bosom/' " I ask the life of your father—I ask the salvation of your own soul" *" Not to save ten thousand lives ;" N С and
and De Maudit broke away as he spoke, and paced the chamber with a disorder¬ ed step ; then turning, and bending on him an eye of flame, " My honour is at stake," he continued ; " my honour, is * the pledge, which binds me to the for¬ tunes of the earl of Leicester." " And only your honour," importu¬ ned Hubert, following, and grasping his arm. " Is there no reward—no recom¬ pense, for all this waste of principle ?" A fire, almost igniting, kindled in the features of De Maudit ; a flush, almost of crimson, gathered on his cheek : İt might have been mistaken for rapture, could rapture have savoured such a mo¬ ment.—" Yes, more, much more!" he exulíingly exclaimed, " the smile—the love—the hand, of the peerless Ingel¬ riea!" ' - " Mighty God !" and Hubert started back, as though a hidden mine had sprung at his feet ; but quick recovering him¬ self, and rallying back all his self-posses¬ sion,
sion, " Whatis that smile—what is that love — what is that hand," he asked, " which treason alone can bind ? Death is the wages of sin ; and death—wOrse than death, is the bribe which tempts* in the smile, the love, the hand, of the lady Ingeirica. Believe me, William— I speak it from conviction, not surmise —her promises are hollow ; her words, sand ; her smile, her love, her hand, false, false as hell !" De Maudit grasped at the hilt of his sword ; but Hubert stood undaunt¬ ed, his eyes fixed on his friend, in pity, not anger ; every feeling of his nature outraged ; yet loath to abandon, loath to condemn.— " Go—go," said William, proudly : " you are safe : I would not strike an unarmed man." " I would, you were as safe from ruin, as I fiOtn violence!" sighed Hu¬ bert — "I would, you were as firmly armed against the illusions of confiding natHre,
nature, as I am hemmed in by your own instinctive courage !" " Tis time we part f and De Maudit moved towards the door ; then pausing, and half turning, " However unlooked, be your presence, here, at Hafeld," he pursued, " safe conduct, and protection, shall attend your going." Hubert only bowed. William had reached the door —William's hand was on the lock of the door—and though his spirit rose al¬ most too high for utterance, yet again he paused, again he turned : it was a withering look of despair; it was a sul¬ len instability of mind, which lived in his dark eye. " Although the bonds of confidence are broken, and the ties of brotherly love rent asunder," he ex¬ claimed, " I would bid you comfort my father, and spare him, in the reci¬ tal, of this, our last interview." " Your father's peace be more pre¬ cious than life," solemnly pronounced Hubert ; " to your father's peace, be sacrificed,
sacrificed, all, save truth. He will not question of the governor of Hafeid; neither, will I blast him with a tale so dire. God—God preserve you, Wil¬ liam, and gift you yet with better thoughts! Should we meet in hostile ranks, be the pang of this hour, an in¬ demnity for what may follow." He spoke, in a voice, broken and inward; for his brave mind was torn by con¬ tending passions, and his heart swollen almost to suffocation. " It is enough," faltered William: " my thanks for your good will. Should we meet in hostile ranks, the event be destiny." He ceased from strong emo¬ tion, then, with an hysteric sob, pursued —" Be a son to my poor father—be a brother to Isabel—and may God prosper the right ! If I did other than venerate your integrity, I would not gift you, in this moment, as of death, with a charge so precious—My father—my sister Isa¬ bel"—
bel" —He fled, and Hubert was left to solitude and to woe. A dizzy, a bewildering mist, seemed to shut out the form of his friend, felt to stimifv all his own faculties: he ex- tended his arms, but he clasped nought save air—he rushed to the door—he shook it almost from its hinges ; but the spring, shooting back into the ward, all his giant strength was im poten t —" Wil¬ liam ! 'William !" he shrieked out, and then he ceased, and listened; hut'twas echo, which died away ; 'twas the still¬ ness of the tomb which followed. De¬ spairing, almost maddened, he cast him¬ self on the stone floor—he buried his face in his clasped hands—he groaned, as though each throb would rend his !ic\irt-stri»gs; death-cold damps gathered on his brow, and every nerve shook with irrepressible emotion. Heavity, in the .successless interview which had closed, did he arraign his own stubborn pride ; did
did he execrate his own cold forbear¬ ance. " I have murdered my friend," he ex¬ claimed—" I have plunged him in a pit of burning sulphur—I have cast him on his own despairing feelings, and given him to the goading vultures of the mind. If 1 had humbled myself—if I had stretched mvself before him—if I had grasped him, held him, until nature and memory revived, he would not have crushed out life; he could not have trampled on the seat of that integrity he honours. Oh, Virgin Mother! if I had——'lie ceased; he sprung erect; for he heard a sound, and he held in his breath to listen. It was a passing foot¬ step, and when it elied away, he felt as though he could challenge earth to pro¬ duce a being ьо wretched. Another, nnd another, rose and fell, and moments were lengthened into hours; and the death-chill of agony had succeeded the feverish struggles of hope and fear, ere that
that calm and dreadful listlessness, which braves the worst, w r as broken by the appearanee of De Maudit — De Maudit, changed past credence ; wan, ghastly ; his features desnoiled of everv vestile of colour; his hair dishevelled; his head without covering; looking like one\ " past hope, abandoned, and by himself given over." Hubert stretched forth his arms, but De Maudit advanced not from the door. " Will you back to the convent of St. Margaret?" he asked. " Not to the convent of St Margaret —not to Kenilworth—neither, from Ha¬ feld, dear William, whilst 1 see you thus/' " My feelings be as nought in the struggle/* rejoined William, passionately —" I would—I will hem you in with safety :—aye, by Heaven, you shall move as free from risk or peril, as though peace smiled on the plains of England!" " What risk, what peril, need I fear"* 1 said
said Hubert : " beyond the peril of this interview, what harm can reach the body?" A portentous cloud of mingled rage and horror gathered on the brow of De Maudit; he gnawed his lip; he shook his dark locks o'er his ashy cheek ; he stood for many moments, perplexed and doubtful, then peering back into the passages carefully closing the door, antl drawing close to the side of the won¬ dering Hubert, " You have betrayed j r ourself to the ear of Henry de Mont- ford," he whispered : " once seized, and known as the partizan of Henry Plan¬ tagenet, who can refute the charge of treacherous espial ?" " The lady Ingelriea Fitzparnel," firm¬ ly replied Hubert; "put her to the proof. Under false pretence, she lured me to the castle of Kenilworth ; she committed me to the guidance of this De Montford ; she bid me seek you at Hafeld ; she taught me——" " She—
" She—she herself—her very self," in¬ terrupted De Maudit, writhing in almost mortal agony. " Aye, dearest William ! And as God shall prosper me, she sought to wed me to the like cause; she rallied all the witchery of her fatal beauty ; she beset me with glosing words, with——" "Hold! hold! if you would not have me curse you—if you would not have rne slay you"—and staggering back, he clung to a settle, to save himself from falling. " Alas! how does my heart, mourn for you—bleed for you !" sighed Hubert, pitying the torture he had inflicted. 4 * Joyfully would I relinquish life, to bring back peace, to restore you to your better self. List to me, William—speak to me, William." But William heard him not, heeded him not; he stood, as though spirit-crushed, palsied, panting, bent ath the war within. "Oh God!" filtered Hubert, pressing to his bide, and
and wringing his hands in despair, " that a woman, and such a woman, should part us;—that a woman, and such a woman, should poison the peace of our lives—should squander our hoard of confidence !" William looked up ; he tried to smile, but it was more like the grim effort of a last agony, for his face was as wan, as though the hand of death had already passed over it.—" It is I, who have marred all—it is I, who have ruined 'ili/* he fai tenni. " Forgive me, Hubert ' I will save you—I will plunge alone into th.e burning gulf— Τ will labour out your rescue, and then—then——" " Wliat then?" questioned Hubert, eager and anxious. William raised his strickened head.— "* Then I will brave my destiny/' he pronounced, in a tone of impressive fer¬ vour. " And now, dear Hubert, let us back to Kenilworth. I would learn fur¬ ther of Ingelriea·—! would hear all her perfidious
perfidious policy. Tis true, you have awakened a hell within me; 'tis true, you have stirred anew the snakes of jealousy: but 1 will be patient; I will oe canu. iiiiucn, uucii iiuueu, nuyivc mei" and he bent his face; antl his cheeks, and his very temples, crimsoned. " There are spots even in the sun—I love, madly love, Ingelriea, with all her faults." Hubert uttered a shuddering cry of horror, and with a convulsive leap, he sprung hack many paces from the side of William. Here was desolation in¬ deed; Itere was tlu» wreck of pride, the wreck of spirit; he saw it with grief of heart; he read the abandonment of all his hopes, in the influence of this per- теши;» woman.·—■** William," he said, after a long, long pause, " I am ready to depart from Hafeid. Grant me your passport hence, and I return forthwith to Hanslape/* ** The pa&sport mubt extend lar be¬ vond
yond the walls of Hafeid," rejoined De Maudit : " not a rood of land, in the counties of Warwick or Stafford, which owns not the sway of Leicester: reta¬ liation too, in the blood so wantonly shed at Northampton, calls for reprisal Henry wields the annihilating brand of discord ; spurning conciliation, he moves but with ruin and death." " And mav not—and are not, the woes, the miseries, so mourned and teit traced to rebellion and open defi¬ ance?" reproachfully interrogated Hu¬ bert " Point out one wreek, comme¬ morating the lagging judgment of the rovai Henry, which shadows not the higher wreck of his people's anarchy? "fried beyond the stretch of human pa¬ tience, he——" " More—much more/ 3 interrupted De Maudit. " Here, in this castle o f ' Ha¬ feld, I can shew n wreck, to damn the boast of Henry's justice. In days of prosperous fortune, this castle of Hafeld, was
was the grant of royal favour. The earl of Kent, never, in thought or act, in commission or in omission, forfeited that favour;—-and yet he was despoiled of this castle of Hafeid ;—and this castle of Hafeld, from witnessing the full spring of his glory, now echoes a cry, w r hich must mount to the judgment-seat against him." He ceased, but Hubert could not answer; his thoughts winged back to the labour of the lady Ingelriea and her maidens, and the like inexplicable sentiment, which at Kenilworth, had interested him in the woes and injuries of the earl of Kent, again lived in his lieart, and converged all his feelings. " The earl of Kent," resumed De Mau¬ dit» " is the pass-word to our vengeance ; 'tis the coneedence we ask at the hands of tèe puerile Henry: let him unbar tbe doors of the earl of Kent's dungeon ; letbim yield him to us, and our sharp¬ est gosd to contention will be blunted." " Think you, the earl of Kent lives ?" and
and Hubert's sympathy spoke in the energy of his accent " I do think it—I do believe it," re¬ plied William. " Escaping from the castle of the Devizes, and torn, by De Cranseumb, from his sanctuary at Mer¬ ton, the earl of Kent, has sunk as a dead letter in the state." « Why judge you, the life of the earl of Kent, superior, to the lives of the million, who have departed hence, since his disappearance?" " Because," and De Maudit spoke with eager confidence, " Henry meets all our demands with stubborn inat¬ tention; and hurling back, our threats and our remonstrances, maintains un¬ broken silence, in ought relating to hie once valued favourite : and though, with some, in brightest prosperity, the thread of life be severed in a moment; with others, amidst pain, privation, and en¬ durance, we see ifc spun even to the spiders finest ligament" vol. Ш, о " True,
" True, most true," said Hubert, feel¬ ingly. " Life is a shifting scene of trial and incertitude ; its gayest sunbeam, flitting ; its heaviest cloud, transitory ; ılıçj хед раоддииа, ил j uy tţ, aııu j.10 öuiii/vvö, pass aw T ay, like the shadow, which rides on the summer breeze." " You are a philosopher," remarked William, fancying implied reproof. " I would rather, as a Christian, pray, my back be fitted to the burden/" sighed Hubert. " But tbis is a language fo¬ reign to our purpose. You hint of the siege o/ Northampton, calling for re¬ prisal, even to the peril of my individual safety/' " The siege of Northampton, stands, a bloody record, of king Henry's wanton ragcV' replied De Maudit " The scene of outrage and of murder, its walls now smoke beneath the brand of the tyrant : and in the capture*, of Peter de Munt- ford, the cousin-—and of Simon de Montford, the brother of your guide from
írom Kenihvorth, be explained, the ne¬ cessity for prompt and determined ex¬ ertion. Know you not, in times like these, when the sickle is turned into the "3WW1U, ttllU. Ъ\1Ъ piUIJXIIK-UV/UPL CAl/ltailgCU for the battle-axe—know you not, cau¬ tion befitteth the upright man, even in his fairest dealings ? Hubert, you have betrayed yourself as the firm adherent of the hostile cause; and De Montford, goaded by the knowledge of his bro¬ ther's close imprisonment in Windsor Castle, calls for your detention, and sus¬ pects me of want of zeal, in this, our stress fbr liberty." *' Be it so," said Habért, firmly: " but for the baron your father, 1 care not, though my doom be death. Ah, WiUiam f life was dear, when sweetened by your friendship : now, all its gayest promises are blighted,* De Maudit brushed a tear from his eye—" I could wish/* he resumed, as though bent but on one purpose, " to о 2 know
ther victories of Henry's arms—should Heaven er will it—reach us tere at Hafeid. Hubert/* and he spoke with impressive earnestness, " your freedom be my care: even though it cost the hope of my life, I stand the gage of its fulfilment." " The lady Ingelriea/' softly pro¬ nounced Hubert. " Aye, though its purchase be her favour/' rejoined William : " though it delve a pit between us, deep, as the depths of ocean/' " God's blessing on those words!" eja¬ culated Hubert, softened almost to weep¬ ing. ** They will comfort me when far away ; they will sooth me in reflection, for they speak a heart, sapped, not lost/* De Maudit was deeply affected ; but ere he had time to give speech to feel¬ ing, the shrill and proîengthened notes of a bugle, succeeded by the hke signal from the warder's tower, roused him into
into vigour: all of sensibility vanished: hb dark eyes kindled new fire; his bronzai cheek flushed a deeper colouring. —" Tarry my coming," he exclaimed ; and then, grasping in adieu, the hand of Hubert, he hurried from the guard¬ room.
KOTES.
