Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The siege of Kenilworth: an historical romance
THE
SIEGE OF KENILWORTH.
CHAPTER I. » ..... vSmt't ?? the lightning's flash ; As clouds, sctiddmg on the inky tempest, It daun'd—it disappeared ! Yet %va*> it eirth, for its errand was Most earthu .'* A HE distant chime of a curfew-bell was heard in the pauses of the storm ; and then again, the hoarse winds gather¬ ed, and deadening every lesser sound, rocked the very base of earth. It was a night, perturbed as the minds of men: the thunder rolled in measured peals, ?md the forked and vivid lightning, rend¬ ing the inky bosom of the heavens, ever ? 4 and
and anon, contrasted surrounding dark¬ ness ;—a night, to scare the ruddy tints of health, to scatter nought, save thought and gloom. " Alack ! our offering gains little fa¬ vour," said sir Roger Mortimer, moving by the side of William de Maudit, ba¬ ron of Hansiapa " Would we had tar¬ ried with the brothers of Bromholme ! What, though St. Andrew owe us a spite, for leaving the shelter of his walls." " Our own sins, be our heaviest de¬ spite," observed the baron r and slack¬ ening the reins of his horse, he crossed his bosom, in piety and contrition. " Hist ! hist !" exclaimed sir Roger, for again the bell sounded, and the whole cavalcade paused. " I hear nought, save the tempest, save the wild roar ofthe elements," said the baron; and again he would have ad¬ vanced, for he was bound on pilgrimage, to the shrine of the Virgin Mother at Walsingham (a). " I hear
" I hear a bell," pursued Mortimer," " and a bell betokened shelter : ought is better, than this pattering rain, and drir ving sleet. Beshrew me, but my pil¬ grim weeds are best fitted to sunshine !" " Our safety lies through grace, not through our own merits," remarked Hanslape : *' here, canopied by the hea¬ vens, are we as secure, as when beneath the roof of our own castles." " As abounding in security, my lord, I grant you," rejoined the knight ; "but lacking all of comfort. God's truth ! I would creep into the lowliest shed-—I would crave shelter with the very kine." At that instant, the baron, springing from his horse, resigned him to the groom ; for a vivid flash of lightning, disclosed a rough hewn cross, within a copse-wood, on tbe road side.—" This be my tarrying-place," he exclaimed, casting himself at its base : " here, leave me ; and here, seek me." In vain sir Roger urged and remon«· ? 5 strated ;
strated ; health was as a feather in the scale of duty : Hanslape*» was the mis¬ sion of devotion ; and the mortifications of the body, were as atonements for transgressions; the writh ings of the flesh, as purification to the spirit. The age in whieh we place the busy scenes of our drama, was*an age of dark¬ ness, credulity, and superstition ; an age, in which reason was lost in the clouds of fanaticism, and man, close bound in the iron gyves of priestcraft; an age, in which indulgences were parcelled out by favour, absolutions administered, and acquittal from the penal fires of purga¬ tory, alike within the jurisdiction of the papal see. u Leave me," urged the baron, as again the chime of the curfew distinctly sounded—" I would be alone—I would be unheard—I would humble myself, here, before my Creator—I would de¬ precate the wrath, which all who breathe excite. Go; I pray you, leave me : my penance,
penance, is not your penance ; neither, is my burden, your burden." " And the pages, and the grooms, my lord?" asked Mortimer, still lingering and reluctant " Bear them with you to shelter," ??- plied the baron : " and should you light on a holy sanctuary, then seek me here, grovelling in mire and clay," " Think of the little William," said sir Roger ; " think of the angel Isabel." The baron pressed his hand upon his forehead.—" Enough—enough," he mur¬ mured. " I will think of all—I will pray to Heaven for all : for pardon, for acceptance, and for resignation." Still Mortimer paused; doubts and apprehensions crowded on each other; he had followed into the copse-wood, and he stood, full of care and thought.— " The times," he articulated ; " the ter- pitude of man ; the lawless hardihood of rapacity; the—the-——" " Reaches not here," interrupted ? 6 Hanslape»
Hanslape, with a melancholy smile: " my amice, my scant scrip, and my pe¬ nance-girdle; owns no lure for the spoiler. Go, my friend. Be it a house of devo¬ tion, and I attend your summons." Sir Roger slowly departed, and the baton, prostrating himself on the wet sward, mingled his sighs with the blast His heart was full; his feelings, sur- * charged, even to bursting ; he feared not the rage of the tempest ; he heeded not the drifting of the rain : he thought of her, he had loved and lost ; of her, now "enskied and sainted," and he almost murmured at the trammels of the flesh, It was the anniversary of his loss—it was the fast of St. Dunstan ; the day, on Whieh the freed spirit of his Alice had vringed to the realms of blessedness; and earth, Was as a barren waste, un- eheered, uncheeriug ; life, a protracted gloomy pilgrimage, dead to energy, and lost to hope. Alas ! fatally had he felt the fallacy of its promises ! the gayest tints
tints had radiated the dawn of his exist* ence ; tints, fading as the brief glories of day ; vanishing, like a shooting star, without the earnest of another rising ! .He knelt, with his forehead pressed against the humid stone, with his hands clasped, with his spirit divorced from all of terrestrial nothingness; be knelt, forget¬ ful of all around, unmindful of the desc- lateness of bis station ; no shudder of fear creeping o'er his chilled limbs ; no thought of loneliness, deepening the gloom of surrounding horrors;—he knelt, until a cold, but steady hand, grasped his arm—until tbe sound of quickened respiration, fanned his very cheek. He started—he looked up : a broad bright flash of lightning, fell on a tall and sha¬ dowy figure at his side ; tbe face, wan unto death; the garb, as a muffling shroud, enveloping the gaunt limbs, sa¬ ble as night. " Rise, pilgrim, or penitent, whatso¬ ever thou mayest be," pronounced the stranger;
stranger; "rise, and succour the desti¬ tute." " Who art thou," demanded the ba¬ ron, shuddering at the tone of his voice, " who thus uncourteously breaketh upon my communion ?" " A man," quickly rejoined the in¬ truder, " governed by imperative cir¬ cumstances; a man, impelled, by the very goad of fate. I would be heard— I must be heard, if thou wouldst save a life." " Proceed," urged Hanslape — "I would be as the merciful Samaritan—I would tread in the enjoined track of cha¬ rity and good-will." " Promise me then," continued the unknown ; " here, at the foot of the cross, in the name of the blessed Jesus, promise, to accept, and to fulfil the trust I would impose ?" " First name that trust," said the ba¬ rem. " I would enter into nought un¬ wittingly." "If
" If you are a true disciple of tbe doc¬ trine, to which you outwardly bend," resumed the unknown, " then will you not turn from the symbol, savouring of humility and sanctification, * Whoso receiveth a little child in my name, receiveth me.' In the name of Jesus then—in the name of the great captain of our salvation," and be bent his knee, and he drew a sleeping infant from be¬ neath his cloak, "accept, succour, foster this little child !" At that momentous instant, the black bosom of heaven was again ignited with lurid flame ; it shot askaunt the closed eyes of the slumbering boy, and a pier¬ cing cry mingled with the quick suc¬ ceeding thunder. It was an appeal, from wbich the kindly nature of man could not shrink ; an appeal, seizing cap¬ tive, the heart and the feelings of Hans¬ lape.—" I do vow to Heaven," he ex¬ claimed ; " and be my vow, on my own bead, a blessing or a curse, as I fulfil, or abuse,
abuse, this, my accepted trust ! I do vow——" and then he ceased, and a uni¬ versal trembling seized him ; for the san, 2 deep-toned voice, falling, like a death- knell on his spirit, pronounced—" Bes¬ ware ! vows to Heaven, savour not ofthe vows of this world !" That voice—those words, teemed with death and fate : the fast of St. Dunstan, was an anniversary, rt^ïete with all that was awful and dire in the life of Hans¬ lape: and though his arms were extend¬ ed, almost unconscious of what he did ; though the child was quick transferred to his guardian bosom, and the earth was again involved in one universal shroud of gloom, he sprung upon his feet, and he threw himself forward, eager to snatch at the cloak of tbe unknown, and forci¬ bly to hold him : but his stretched-out arm grasped at air, for he touched nought of flesh : another vivid flash revealed the very leaves upon the trees, but it fell not upon the muffled form of the stranger. He
He Was gone ; he had vanished, like à spi- ritof thenight,and the baron stood,d *bt- ful, perplexed, and agitated; yet did pity plead for his innocent burden, and carefully he wrapped him in the folds of his cloak. The child, cradled in warmth and comfort, fell into sweet slumber; and Hanslape, awe-struck and wondering, again knelt before the symbol ofhis faith. He prayed for his own tortured spirit; he prayed for the tender pledges öf his lost Alice's love : and as he mused, upon his absent William, upon his darling Isa* bel, he unconsciously fondled the new claimant to his favour, until his help¬ lessness, and his isolation, grew, as it were, into his bosom. Hanslape pos¬ sessed a heart, fraught with nature's best and brightest attributes; with mercy, with Christian charity, with benevolence, with universal philanthropy ; yet, like all of earth, was there a blot to mar per¬ fection : Hanslape was proud, sensitive-
ly proud, ofhis honours, and his ancestry. The sound of horse-hoofs roused from the trance of other worlds—sir Roger Mortimer, zealous to pilot into a safer haven, returned to claim the promise in parting : the bell had led him to a pre- ceptory of the knights õf St John of Je¬ rusalem, and hospitality and comfort lured from the peltings of the storm. ** I bear in my bosom, a new candi¬ date fbr grace and favour," said the ba¬ ron, slowly following from the copse- wood ; and then he recited the mysteri¬ ous incident, which had awakened every thrill of sympathy. " A child !" exclaimed the astonished Mortimer. ** Gods truth, 'tis a teeming shower, to produce such fruit !" and he laughed in the lightness of his heart " A child! a living breathing child !" re¬ plied the baron, and carefully opening his cloak, he guided the hand of the knight, to the warm forehead ofthe little sleeper, " A child ! a full-grown bouncing child !"
child !" shouted sir Roger. " Marry !" and heartily he laughed at his own con¬ ceits, " who will believe, that this lump of flesh, and blood, and blue veins, came in a whirlwind ?" " Perhaps," observed Hanslape, im¬ bibing a momentary flash of his gaiety, V had you been the finder, the world might have suspected a more natural origin : for me-——" he paused ; he sigh¬ ed, and all his wonted sadness returned. " 'Tis a God-send, however," remark¬ ed the knight " But the parents : can they be accessary ?—Can they be knead¬ ed out of human clay ? Think, my lord, if it were your own William." The ba¬ ron spoke not, but his shudder was al¬ most audible. " I should like," conti¬ nued sir Roger, " to solve the mystery, to sift out the bequeathes If the varlet has stolen the urchin, why palm him on a stranger ?" " Let us return to the copse-wood," said
said Hanslape, after a brief pause ; and he turned as he spoke. " Were the boy safe housed* I would fain adventure the pursuit," rejoined Mortimer: " but how move in dark* ness? how seek, without a ray or a clue ? Doubtless, the plan is well laid; and how subvert that plan, when the very heavens league against discovery ?" " True," said the baron, a^d he cross¬ ed his bosom as he spoke, for a vivid ^ash of lightning, served but to shew the extreme loneliness of the spot. The violence of the storm had passed away ; the thunder rumbled at a greater distance, but the rain still pattered, and the hollow wind sighed mournfully in the foliage : the road wound amidst marshes and morasses, and the continu¬ ed darkness of the atmosphere, rendered the footing dangerous and uncertain: yet the baron declined remounting; ahd waving back the groom, who would have lightened him of his burden, he took
took the offered arm of his friend, and proceeded in silence, " With the first peep of morning* I will scour yon nook of mystery," said Mortimer, starting from profound thought " Think you," asked Hanslape, " that the stranger will tarry throughout the night?" " Perhaps not," answered sir Roger, " yet may he leave some trace of his be¬ ing. I would you had grappled witb him on the instant !" " It was an instant of awful import," observed the baron ; " an instant, in which I suspected neither design nor subterfuge. Poof forlorn one!" and be fondled more closely the unconscious child. "An instant," remarked Mortimer, " which has stow ? ed the little moppet into a safe harbour. Will you bear him with you to Walsingham, my lord ? or will
will you consign him to the brothers of St. John ?" " Consign him," repeated Hanslape; " put bim from me, when Heaven's own hand has wrought the miracle? Oh, no, no ! the gift must be holy, for it was completed at the foot of the cross !" " Then you will foster him with your own nurslings—you will rear him in your own castle?" " I know not. Prostrate before the image of the Virgin Mother, I will pe¬ tition grace and favour ! In my pass through life, I hope to perform my duty, be that dutv ever so arduous," and tbe baron breathed a shuddering sigh : for the light wing of fancy, transporting him beside the monumental tablet, no¬ ting the rest of his lost Alice, spoke the despoliation of his own domestic feiicity. * t Itis fit it should beso," uttering a 1 'ad his thoughts. '* Heaven tries our faith, through afflictions, through tears, through the writhings of the spirit : were
were we too happy, we might forget tbe tax entailed by our own transgressions." *' Methinks," exclaimed Mortimer, anxious to turn tbe mournful bent of his reflections. " the guardian' is well chosen; the season, politically timed. Beshrew me, but the fame of the baron of Ilanslape's charity has reached even here !" <k Friendship is a blind flatterer," said the baron, bis cheeks, bis very temples, flushing with modest consciousness. " Not so," rejoined sir Roger. " By tbe gage of my knighthood, I would not flattera reigning monarch !" " Friendship, like love," observed Hanslape, " sees through a medium of its own : but in this incident, I can read nought of equivoque or design." " I can read much of deep trick and >oundpolicy," pursued Mortimer. " How know you, my lord, but this very boy, bora of some vassal on your own barony, has shadowed every rood of our pilgri¬ mage,
mage, watching, but the fit and prospe¬ rous moment to lay siege to your known humanity ? how------" " Pshaw ! pshaw !" and the baron be¬ trayed an impatience very foreign to his native bias. " You are a philanthropist," said the knight, " and you would weigh all mankind by tbe standard of your own deeds." " I am a father" feelingly pronoun¬ ced Hanslape ; " and not to ransom a world, would I cast a child on the chance protection of a stranger." " I am a bachelor," good-humouredly replied Mortimer ; ". and blessed be the saints, all care as yet centres in self!' " And as such," concluded the baron, " your judgments are erroneous and wijd. It may not always be so, my friend; and when I see your nursling, fostered at the breast of its mother ; when I trace the tender germ, half budding, I will ask ) uu, whether from ambi*
ambition —or whether from goading pride—or whether from aught of earth- born interest, you could rend it from its parent tree ?" Mortimer spoke not ; he had boasted of his " single blessedness," yet did a strange, a pleasurable, a thrilling sen¬ sation, glow in every vein ; a sensation, melting ought of ice, and turning all to softness. Nature frames not man for dull and moody selfishness ; and the image of wife and child, those links, those tenderest links in tbe chain of association, quickened the pulses at his heart ! " It may not always be so" repeated Hanslape, in a tone of touching soft¬ ness ; " the kindly sympathies may yet be awakened, and tbe heart divorced from self." Sir Roger smiled, a light jest ho¬ vered upon his lip, but it died unut- tered ; fór the near approach to the pre- ceptory of St John, in which, already. vol, l ? most
most of the retinue had found shelter, checked ought of banter. The inky hue of the sky bad scudded before the gathering breeze, and the lone walls, dedicated to holiness, rose, blackened, in the indistinct gloom. Not a sound spoke the haunt of active brea¬ thing animation ; not a tongue pro¬ nounced a welcome ; not a kindling ray betokened comfort and hospitality : a sepulchral solemnity, like unto a misty 'shroud, pervaded each corner of the building; an awe, inspiring a blank, a morbid chill, froze each current of cheer¬ fulness. " As well might we seek shelter in a charnel-house," whispered sir Roger. " The rest of all flesh," pronounced the baron ; and then he ceased, for the gate was unbarred, and they r passed through tbe archway. He thought of his absent borne, as he shivered through the stone-arched passages; thought of the bliss of bis past life, of his children, fostered
fostered in ease, cradled in the warm lap of luxury ; and he pressed intuitive¬ ly to the glowing shelter of his own bo¬ som, the unconscious candidate for grace and favour. He pined to behold the little creature, cast so mysteriously upon his humanity ; to trace its features, to seek out any sign for future recog¬ nition: but even in the refectory, he could only feel the fanning of its breath; for the conqueror's arbitrary y policy was in full force; the curfew-bell had ceased, and nought, save lingering heat, was emitted from the smothering embers : pitchy darkness enveloped eacb corner of the chamber, and the deep tone of the brother-servitor, knolled like the dirge of hospitality.—" A manchet, and a dry bed," he exclaimed, ** is all I can be¬ stow : the holy commander, and the pious brothers of obedience, have re¬ tired to rest, and my power extends no further." ? 2 " Enough,"
" Enough," said Hanslape ; but Mor¬ timer murmured at the lenten fare. " The penance," rejoined the servitor, " extends not beyond the morrow. I would I could light on dainties, though the staff of life, methinks, demands man's primest gratitude." " We are pilgrims," said the baron, " and our duty be to fast and pray." " Bound to the shrine of tbe Virgin Mother at Walsingham," exclaimed sir Roger ; " but overtaken by the storm, and tangled midst the wilds." " O'ertaken, but not o'erwhelmed ; tangled, but not subdued," observed the holy man : " 'tis wel!, my sons ; in the world, the snare is often more subtle ;" and then, guiding through the darkness, he led to the dormitory, set apart for the accommodation of strangers. Fatigue, the nurse of human care, soon effaced from the mind of sir Roger Mortimer, all of present privation : the baron of Hanslape too, although not pillow r ed
pillowed on down, hushed his infant charge w r ith thoughtful caution, and kissing its polished brow, in remem¬ brance of his own William and Isabel, piously invoking the guardianship of all good angels, stretched himself upon the hard couch of ascetic austerity, and soon forgot that temptation, endurance, and sorrow, is the bounden inheritance of man.
? 3 CHAP-
CHAPTER II.
His life wns gentio; and the elc-menfb So mixt in him, that Nature might stand »}-, Aii'i sav to alt the world, *' This was a man !" 6kakì-,4i»earf. William de Maudit, baron of Hans¬ lape, from the Norman conquest, could boast a long line of brave and heroic ancestry. His father had shadowed the glories of our first Richard ; had reaped, on the plains of Palestine, many r a death¬ less laurel ; had aided in every struggle for the deliverance of the holy places ; had performed pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and returned to his native land, enrich¬ ed by many a precious relic, by many¬ an assurance of sanctification and grace. But scarce was his banner, his hauberk, and his lance, hung up in the hall of his
his heritage ; scarce had he returned to the domestic claims of family; scarce had he hailed the calm of social con¬ cord ; scarce had he blessed his little son, or joyed in the smile of his bosom's partner—when, on the deliverance of Christendom's royal champion from a cruel and treacherous captivity, a war broke out between England and France. Deadly was tbe feud, engendered in rivalship, in personal animosity ; in¬ flamed, fomented, by mutual injuries, and crying acts of injustice : it was an age for martial prowess, for magnanimi¬ ty, and for daring ; and again did loy¬ alty enrol Hanslape beneath the stan¬ dard of his legitimate king. He loved the puissant Richard, with an enthusi¬ asm, secondary but to bis worship of God : he bad grasped, in all the mad zeal of early fanaticism, the cross and the sword ; he had wooed acceptance through the blood of infidelity ; he had toiled out sanctification, through many ? 4 an
an achievement of hardihood ; he had aided in the siege of Ptolemais, of As- calon, of Joppa—in the reduction of many a fastness^ and many a strong hold of the warlike Saladin ; he had stood the brunt of clime, the rage of ocean, the more rancorous strife of man : and now, in a contest, owing birth in the treachery of Philip Augustus, and fan¬ ned by the indignant ire of the galled and irritated Richard, he devoted his strength and his life to the mere feuds of personal hatred. With a spirit, buoyant and ardent; with a courage, braced beneath the invigorating sway of adventure, he kissed away the tears dimming the bright eyes of the trem¬ bling baroness, and consigning to her arms, and to her tenderness, the infant heir of his honours, vaulted into his saddle, little deciphering the dark page of his coming fortune. Heading his vassals and retainers, and joining the vast army so hastily collected by king Richard»
Richard, he crossed into Normandy; and after divers skirmishes, and ven¬ turous feats of valour ; after the reduc¬ tion of Verneuil, and the sacking of Mirabel, in the siege of the castle of Loches, he fell, stricken beneath the death-wound. It was the hand of friendship, which wiped from his brow, the ice-cold sweat —it was the bosom of friendship, which supported his drooping head—it was the assurances of friendship, which spoke peace to his parting spirit ! In the rich and teeming land of promise ; the " land of vines, and fig-trees, and pomegranates ; of oil, olives, and ho¬ ney ;" William Mareschal, earl of Pem¬ broke, had been the partner of his toils, tbe like candidate for immortality and for glory : and now, in the gasping ex¬ tremity of writhing suffering nature, rivetted by interest, by sympathy, and by respect, to the gory bier of honour, he watched the waning strength, the ? 5 fast«
fast-ebbing, the fluctuating pulse of struggling life. He saw, in the dying hero before him, the baseless dream of this WOrld 4 § hope ; he read the fate- fraught lesson of earthly insufficiency, in every laboured failing respiration ; be traced, in the rapid dominion of the grim tyrant, in the annihilation of youth and vigour, in the blight and mildew of beauty and of power, the brief vision, the subtle shadow, of what man calls happiness. It was a home-lesson to pride and to consciousness; and he bosomed it with pain of heart ; he cherished it, amid the springtide of his brightest fortune. Soothing every mental re¬ gret ; accepting every enjoined trust ; softening eveiy pang of inquietude, and despoiling death of his bitterest terrors, Pembroke beheld the honoured clav of the warrior deposited in its consecrated bed : he aided in the solemn rites of se¬ pulture ; and wben the victory at Ven- dosme, obtained by Richard over Philip Augustus,
Augustus, produced the short-lived truce of one single year ; whilst Hans¬ lape, " silent slept, and dreamed of wars no more," the earl returned to England, to fulfil tbe painful duties of his guardi¬ anship. Alas ! how did hope wither ! how did peace droop beneath the dire visitation ! The baroness, as was the custom of the age, within a religious sanctuary, had learned to ply the distaff and the loom : and now, that the sun of happiness was set ; now, that joy and bliss lay bleeding in the tomb, native pensive- ness deepened into melancholy. Her thoughts, her heart, turned to the low sojourn of religion, to the cloistered gloom of holiness and contemplation. She luid lost the stay of her strength, the idol of her youth's worship; and now, like a lily, bruised and broken, battered by the rude blast of pitiless destiny—now, would she shrink away from a world, despoiled of every blos- c 6 som,
som, bereaved of every gilded lure, to mislead and to betray. She would de¬ vote the remnant of existence to prayer : wedded to the memory of the husband she had lost, she would sacrifice upon the altar of murdered love, every T pro¬ mise of the future. She would shroud her wretchedness in the veil of profes¬ sion ; she would fly from a spot, haunt¬ ed by the ghost of departed joy ; she would forsake a dwelling, where every chamber, every corner, freshening the pangs of remembrance, served but, as relies, to open anew the wounds of the heart:—in sackcloth and in mourning, in privation and in penance, she would pour out the free-will offering of her hopes ; she would bind herself to the duties of ascetic rule ; she would* chain herself to the one cold cell of forbear¬ ance and mortification ; immolating eve¬ ry lure of wealth, extracting every lin¬ gering weakness, exterminating every infirmity of warring nature, she would patiently
patiently await her summons to the world of spirits, "Think of tbe infant William- think of the darling son of Hanslape," urged tbe countess of Pembroke, feel¬ ingly commiserating in all her sorrows. The widow raised her stricken head. —" Not a hundred Williams—not a hundred sons," she faltered, " can com¬ pensate the loss of his father. My hap¬ piness, my very spirit, lies buried in the grave of Hanslape; and though I may toil out whole years of lingering existence, I must toil, without energy, and without hope. Had Heaven visit¬ ed me with any other ill, any other en¬ tí u ranee, any other affliction, I bad not been quite crushed, quite lost :—had Heaven spared my husband, his tender¬ ness, to soften ; bis dear voice, to sooth and to reason ; his upholding arm ; his —his------" Again her face fell droop¬ ing on her bosom, and tears and suffo¬ cating sobs checked utterance.—" Ah ! lady
lady Pembroke, could your own sons, your fown promising boys, blunt the pang of such a blow ?" The countess could not speak; she couid only press in sympathy the hand of the mourner : hers too had been the union of love ; and her feelings told her, the close of such a union, must be the total blight ofthe heart. The nursery annals of the infant ba¬ ron of Hanslape, savoured of bigoted observances; cradled amid gloom and spirit-killing austerity ; lisping the cre¬ do, and the paternoster, ere yet he knew they signed of sanctification ; un¬ til his tenth year, he lived in the castle of hi$ heritage, surrounded by the fa¬ thers of the church, and trained to holi- ne$s, by example and by habit. Per¬ suasion and argument, had stayed, not conquered, the enthusiastic bias of the youthful widow : a nun in heart, she tamed bat the fitting season, to immo- * late her earthly to her heavenly duties : lord
brd Pembroke had aroused the voice of nature within her: but though she yielded her bosom as the fittest haven for her son's helplessness, her zeal slum¬ bered, but to awaken with renovated energy. Sometimes, she would steep him in her tears; she would fondle him, as the precious relic of bliss ; she would bail him, as the renovating sun of her blasted spirit, as the day-star of her for¬ tune and her hopes : then, would she put him from her; would she banfsh him, for whole days, her caresses, as though a baited lure, a limed snare, to hold back her soul from God ; would she resort to penance and to self-inflic¬ tion, martyring the flesh, and toiling out grace, in fasting» in night-watching, and in prayer. Alarmed for the happiness of his little ward, and dreading lest example should divorce him from ever> social calling, lord Pembroke interposed the authority of guardian: but though consigned to the
the same tutor as his sons ; though transplanted info the busy scenes of life and animation; though invited to the recreation of tilting, hawking, and hounds, early initiation had stamped the die of the baron of Hanslape's cha¬ racter. He was thoughtful ; he was re¬ ligious : not wedded to the priesthood, but devoted to the impressive habits of his faith. In the death of his father, and in the example of his noble guar¬ dian, he imbibed the spirit of true loy¬ alty; and anchoring his hopes and his strength upon his legitimate monarch, he ever stemmed, with a policy far be¬ yond his years, the dangerous swaj r of party. He was proud of his ancestors ; proud of the name he inherited, un- blenched and undefiled ; proud of the monuments of might and of valour, which darkened, in many a sweeping banner, his fretted hall ; he worshipped the heroism of the magnanimous Rich¬ ard : he listened to his deeds of adven¬ ture
ture and hardihood, to his zeal and to his prowess, to his mortal efforts in the holy warfare he had waged, his enmity to the blasphemers of hi« faith, his de¬ votion to the cause of Christendom* with an enwrapt and a glowing spirit ! He was young, very young, when beneath the walls of the castle of Cha- luz, Bertram de Gurdon, shot the fatal arrow, freighted with death : yet he mourned, with bleeding consciousness, the vast, the irreparable loss, in this most zealous soldier ofthe cross; mourn¬ ed, with grief of heart, the blight of heroism, in the untimely fall of the brave and puissant Richard. His open¬ ing mind, fostered, as a ray of bright¬ est recollection, the recited close of the monarch's mortal pilgrimage: his for¬ giveness of injury ; bis acquittal of the murderer, spite of the throes of excru¬ ciating torture ; his piety—his humility —his debasement of himself—his ac¬ knowledgment of error—his type of pe¬ nitence,
nitence, in willing his body to be pla¬ ced at the grave's foot of his father- all, all, stamped him, as worthy of ho-- mage, in the young mind of the grow¬ ing enthusiast :—and Hanslape would listen to the anecdotes recited by the eari of Pembroke; would lure him back to hb sojourn in Palestine ; would hang upon his feats of militant warfare, with a devotedness, with an intensity of in¬ terest, defying every worldly casualty to dissipate. It was then—it was there, that loyalty shot into his soul ; that it became a very part of his nature ; that growing with his growth, strengthening ivith his strength, not all the turbulence of faction, not even the pusillanimity of the weak and wicked John, could stagger the bent of his principles, could overthrow his allegiance : he clung to the fortunes of his liege lord, through every blast of anarchy, through every warring storm of rebellion : and though he depreeated crime, and mourned the scourge
scourge of universal ruin, yet he sided against the bold and haughty federaey of the hostile barons ; and in defiance of their threats and their invitations, zea-. lously maintained the thorny track of his duty. It is not for us, to paint, the desola¬ tion, the ruin, the dismay, which turned the teeming harvests of England into barrenness; which despoiled the rich promises of creation, sweeping the be¬ som of universal destruction throughout the land.—History, the iron nomencla¬ ture of human actions, has sufficiently perpetuated the barbarous reprisals of that disastrous period ;—the infuriate malice, wbich, witb fire, and with sword, pillaged, ransacked, and destroyed;— the black deeds of the reigning tyrant, who ruling " his people with a rod of iron, broke tbem in pieces like a potter's vessel; bound their princes in chains, and tbeir nobles with links of iron." It is not for us, to linger o'er the feuds, long
long and stubbornly maintained, be¬ tween despotism and native indepen¬ dence ; to swell the pages of our story, with the schedule of the great charter, enfranchising from slavery, and impart¬ ing energy and life to action ! Runne- mede will ever be embalmed in the soul's soul of every Englishman, as the precious birthplace of manumission—as the hallowed spot, where the earliest germ of liberty was planted ! Influenced and fashioned by the firm and unbending honour of the earl-mare- sehal, who through the disastrous reign of king John, adhering to his chequered fortunes, transferred, with unshaken loyalty, his allegiance and his influence to the infant Henry; the maiden sword of the youthful baron of Hanslape, ar¬ dent, and brave, and zealous, was drawn at the siege of Mont sorel. There, he fought by the side of sir Roger Mortimer ; of William, of Rich¬ ard, of Gilbert, the sons of Pembroke ; and
and there, he plucked the first laurel, from the blood-red soil of carnage. The rapid advance of the count of Perche, with the lord of the castle, Saher earl of Winton, heading an armed host, speed¬ ily compelled the royal party to raise the siege : and almost shadowing the march of the French army, the earl of Pembroke, chosen, during the minority, protector ofthe realm, summoning, from every quarter, all his forces, quickly in¬ vested Lincoln. The true spirit of fa¬ naticism—crediting Guallo, the pope's legate, as wielding the thunders of Omnipotence—glowed in every 7 mailed breast : the knights, and the warriors, panted to fight with their excommuni¬ cated enemies ; panted, as in the earliest zeal of crusado, to purchase their own redemption in the loss of life :—for the legate, and the bishop of Winchester, held forth, the full absolution of sin, the bliss of heaven, and the lure of eter¬ nal salvation, to all who fell in the cause
cause of the infant monarch. It was one spontaneous impulse, one spring of holiness, which impelled the legions of the protector : every mystery of grace, every religious rite, which could sanctify and assure, incased them in corselets of steel : at Newark, where for three whole days they had sojourned, to re¬ cruit both man and beast, they bumbled themselves in confession; and fortified against sin and the grave, strengthened and nerved by aid of the soul-savipg eucharist, they hailed the towers and the spires of Lincoln as tbe pass to Pa¬ radise. It was in this effort of strength and loyalty, this final blow to the hopes of France, that the tempered shield of Mortimer, covered the breast of Hans¬ lape; that the bond of gratitude, firm, and lasting as existence, rivetted the tie of early interest. Mortimer warded the shaft of death ; and Hanslape, burst* ing, budding into life and happiness, into
into all which constitutes enjoyment, which dazzles the eyes and the fancy, received the priceless service, as the richest gift of grace. Fire and carnage, ruin and overthrow, mark the strife of man ! The gallant forces of the protector, mounting the walls by scalade, and bearing down all resistance, pierced, sword in hand, into the city : havock and desolation marked their track : Lincoln was yielded to pillage; and her castle, her cathedral, her monasteries, her very churches- anathematized by the legate's ban—be¬ came one scene of outrage and violence. The fall of the count of Perche, and the capture of many of the confederate barons, was the death-blow to the claims and the interests of France : prince Louis, spurred by the desperate state of his fortunes, concluded a hasty peace with the protector, and evacuating the king¬ dom, the fatal and the appalling snakes of
of civil war, once more withdrew their blood-red crests. Strengthening in many a bond of fel¬ lowship and favour, the early earnests of friendship, sir Roger Mortimer ac¬ companied the baron of Hanslape into Buckinghamshire ; and there, within the hall of his heritage, did he hang up his coat-of-mail, and woo the recreations of peace : there, visited by the sons of Pembroke, did he exchange the toil and the hazard of past strife, for the mimic war of the tilt-yard; the rage and the roar of battle, for hawking and for hounds. It was the season for gay revelry and agile sports, and Hanslape was light of heart, for care had not sprinkled her wormwood ; yet would the solitary cell of his self-sacrificing mother, often rise to rob him of his cheerfulness; would the bland jest of his mirth-loving companions, contrast her sombre chosen destiny. She was a nun in St Mary's monastery at Nun¬ eaton :
eaton : there, had she doffed the pride of human grandeur, the dignity of state, the perishable lures of wealth and great¬ ness; there, in meek humility, in piety, and in faith, had she tracked the srlo- rious example of its saintly founder—-of Amicia, the wife of Robert Bossu, earl of Leicester ; like her, martyring at the shrine of holiness, all of illusive plea¬ sure ; like her, dedicating her life to privation and to God, she hoped to live, to die, to sleep, in earnest of hereafter blessedness '
VOL. I. D CHAP-
CHAPTER III. —— - ——------- í hu 14 a creature. Would *>ht begin a ^4t, nuüit (punch the zu*. Of alî professors eise; makt, proselytes Of who she but Ud foliou. Ns-uuum \ * Hanslape bad yielded bis panting pal¬ frey to tbe groom, and accompanied by sir Roger Mortimer, was threading the intersecting path, winding amidst briars and brushwood, and sheltered from u noonday sun by o'erclustering trees when bis attention was arrested, by a traveller, silvered with age, and flagging with weariness. u Whither speed yoti, my friend ?" asked tlie baron, pausing, with bis na¬ tive smile of courtesy " I journey to the castle of Hanslape," replied the peasant * " fbr speed, God wot
wot, I lost my speed in the reign of king Richard of blessed memory !" " To the castle of Hanslape, say you '* and on what mission ?" " On the mission of an angel," an¬ swered the traveller ; " and my business lies with my lord baron himself." " An angel, forsooth !" repeated Mor¬ timer, looking archly in tbe glowing face of Hanslape. " Aye, an angel, sir knight," pursued the man ; %i as good as she is fair ; and as fair as she is good !" " Marry ! and a doughty Mercury she speeds on love's errand,' rejoined Mor¬ timer, laughing: " but thrift, thrift, fin¬ al ready are you at the speech of my lord baron himself." The peasant bowed his bead, and doffed his bonnet—' Explain, my ho¬ nest friend," said Hanslape. " I am the person you seek." íé I come from tbe lady Alice de Bel¬ lámon t, tbe daughter of my lord the d 2 earl
earl of Warwick," faltered the peasant, c< I come, greeting—that is, I come, cra¬ ving some token of your well-being." " The lady Alice de Bellamon t," re¬ peated Hanslape. " You are in error, my friend, I never saw tbe maiden," " Aye, but tbe maiden has seen you," significantly remarked Mortimer " Pshaw, man, buckle modesty in your scrip, and resolve the mystery, in youi own portly seeming. By the rood, I would yield my spurs, for tbe like bright beam of Fortune's favour ! Tis a golden shower, wbicb spangles not every man'- path"—and again he laughed, iX what he called Cupid's lacquey. A momentary crimson flushed tbe cheek ofthe peasant; a ray of fire-flash¬ ing anger, kindled in bis eye.· —" Tbe lady Alice de Bellamont is chaste as morn's earliest dew-drop," be exclaimed ; " fair and rare, sir knight, but ill-fashion¬ ed fc: ought of banter l The lady Alice de lîeilamont, is a God's-grace upon the vassals
vassals of my lord the earl ! a blessing, a sunbeam, upon every sorrower î is ------" " I did but jest," interrupted sir Roger. The peasant placed his spread hand úpon his breast.—" Aye, my lord," ear¬ nestly and feelingly ; " but the fame of a maiden is far too sacred for jest: like the drifted snow, it loses not the rude print of incursion," ír Shrewd and apt," observed Mor¬ timer; " but hasten, friend, arul unriddle the riddle." " Mine is no riddle, no night-work, no mystery, sir knight. I was born the vassal of ray lord the earl of Warwick ; and my father, and my grandfather, before me—I have grown grey in the service of my lord the earl of Warwick, and I would yield my life for his ho¬ nour." tí Be brief, I pray you," said Hans¬ lape: " I would fain learn the behest of the lady Alice de Bellamont." The peasant spoke not; he drew a d 3 vellum
vellum from the close folds ofhis doublet* and he presented it with a bend of low¬ liness. The baron perused it with an eager eye. "If thou hast escaped, safe and un- maimed from the wars," ran the scroll, " yield a token of God's grace, to Geoffry of Nuneaton." " Of Nuneaton !" exclaimed Hanslape, every thought, every feeling, flying to the lone sanctuary of his mother: " know you ought of the convent of St Mary?" " I abide almost within the shadow of the convent of St. Mary," replied the peasant : " and I say my prayers in the chapel of the convent of St. Mary, at noon and at eventide." " Know you ought of the holy sisters of St. Mary ?" interrogated the baron. " I know that they are righe pious," rejoined Geoffry; "that bidding defi¬ ance to the lures of Satan, girded with the shield of the Spirit, they offer to alt
all flesh, the ensample of godliness and grace." " And the lady Alice de Bellamont," said Hanslape, anxiously. " The lady Alice de Bellamont, røy lord," answered the peasant, " is a boarder now at St. Mary's." " Enough—enough," said Hanslape ; for a new light broke athwart his brain, and a tear gathered in his eye. " Go you to the castle: tarry your leisure, and your strength ; and in a brief season, you shall know my bidding." " What of this lady Alice de Bella¬ mont ?" asked sir Roger, wondering at the cloud of care, quick shrouding every vestige of cheerfulness. " The lady Alice de Bellamont is a ministering angel of charity !" replied Hanslape ; " a physician to the sick soul, pouring balm and honey into the wounds, my graceless hand has dealt !" " As how ?" demanded Mortimer. " KnoiV you not, that my mother is d 4 a nun,
a nun, in the priory, of the order of Fontevrauld, at Nuneaton ?" " Howbeit, I trace no light peering midst the darkness." " Know you not," again questioned the baron, " that nature defies even the ice-shroud of profession;—that linger¬ ing, w f restling, with the boasted rigidity of monachal rule, she still adhesively clings to the bonds and the ties of the flesh?" *' I have heard so—I do believe so," said Mortimer. " Doubtless," pursued Hanslape, strug¬ gling down the rising sigh, " the fame of our conquest of Lincoln has pierced beyond the roar of the combat ; doubt¬ less, many a blood-stained exaggeration has grown and gathered, and spread throughout the land. Outliving the strife of that memorable day, I ought to have credited nature—I ought to have considered the feelings of the mother 5 spite of the veil of profession. Perhaps rumour
rumour has added my name to the slain ; perhaps ------" " It is not too late to refute the lying mischief," interrupted sir Roger. " No, not too late—the saints be praised, not too late !" energetically pro¬ nounced the baron : " but that anxiety ought to have been spared ; those tears, those bours of wakefulness and watch¬ ing, ought to have been given to de¬ votion. My negligence, and my glaring omission, registers against me—I have warred with heaven, in outraging the feelings of heaven's servant." " And your penance," said Mortimer, half doubtful, half playful. Hanslape regarded him with a fixed and melancholy eye.—" You cannot re¬ solve what passes within," he mur¬ mured, " or you would not thus lightly banter," " Banter, my lord. God's truth ! I speak in sober earnestness. Will you to Nuneaton ? or will you to Walsingham ? d 5 or
or will you to the ghostly shrine of St Thomas a Becket? or to Glastonbury? or to Bromholme ? Nay, if to Palestine, if to the holy sepulchre of the blessed Jesus, I will bear you fellowship." The baron extended his hand.—" To Nuneaton : first, upon the mission of duty and feeling." " Enough, my lord. To-morrow, be¬ fore the crow of chanticleer, if you see fitting." " But I would go alone—I must gu alone," thoughtfully resumed Hanslape: " no eye sliall witness the weakness of her who would fain outlive all weak¬ ness. My mother labours for the mar¬ tyrdom of the flesh: the lingering in¬ firmities of nature must be respected. Here," and again he perused the vellum, " is an iron testament, that human feel¬ ing cannot be doffed at the altar of immolation. No, no, my friend, I must go alone, lest a tear should start in de¬ spite of cloisteral discipline." ** Alone,»
" Alone," repeated the knight— *' alone, when my verv spirit craves after godliness." " When I return from Nuneaton," rejoined Hanslape, " ere again I plunge into the follies, the nothings of time- killing illusion, I will exchange the sword for the penance-girdle ; the badges of worldly distinction, for the staff and the scrip: in humbleness, and in true zeal, I will bear my offering to the virgin mother at Walsingham." ,t That is," archly observed Mortimer, * s should no breathing virgin monopolize your worship; should-----" tS What mean you ?" " I mean, that by woman came dis¬ obedience into the world; and man, tempted by the first Eve, has been lured by the witchery of Eve's daughters, ever since the fall." " You judge by the inflammability of your own composition," said the baron. u But where lurks the smiling mischief? d 6 —-where,
—where, the siren, to tempt, midst the depths and the shallows?" " Nay, ask honest Geoffry," replied Mortimer, " Said he not, he speeded on tbe mission of an angel ?" 4t An angel !" murmured Hanslape. pressing the vellum to bis lips; " a so¬ lacing comforJng angel to my poor mother! I pray you, spare me: 'tis the contrasting humanity of tbe lady Alice, whieh makes my negligence tbe more glaring." " Well, well," and tbe knight signi¬ ficanti ν shrugged his shoulders, * É we ·/ <vO * shall see. Time models and fashions many an embryo fancy-—time is a surt resolver, a bare-faced expounder. 1 cry your grace fbr the pilgrimage though, for fain would I shrive my conscience at the footstool of our lady." " Enough," exclaimed the baron. 44 God willing, side by side, will we journey to Walsingham, barefooted and bareheaded; 'tis a track, trodden by piety
piety and faith, and I would our offering savour of the calling ! To-morrow, I hie to Nuneaton : soon as day's first blush dapple the east, I start on my expiatory mission." " And honest Geoffry ?" asked Mor¬ timer. " I will leave him here, to woo rest and strength," answered Hanslape: " his stiff and aged joints, but ill tally with my anxiety. To-morrow I depart. Tarry you, and act the host, until, with all diligence, î return, I trow, with a lighter heart, and a clearer conscience." The morrow came, and the misty vapours, lingering, and struggling, and close shrouding the uplands, hung, like light and shadowy wreaths, o'er each feature of the landscape; the distance was close enveloped, and the grotesque towers, and turrets of the castle, still involved in gloom; yet was sleep ba¬ nished the wakeful eyes of the baron, and the very first blush of radiance, saw him
him eager in preparation. He quitted his little oratory, enriched with the bless¬ ing of his soul's confessor ; and followed by r the usual retinue, which the wild and savage habits of depredation and violence rendered so indispensable to safety, he clapped spurs to horse, as though speed could keep pace with inclination. The novv rich and teeming bosom of Eng¬ land, crowned with plenty, and scattered thick with prodigal favour, was then, bleak, barren, and uncultivated ; covered with forests, heaths, and morasses ; wild, almost to terror-striking solitude, and but thinly dappled with the signs and the proofs of cultivation : now, the garner of wealth, the emporium of in¬ dependence, England was then, rude, unblest, subject to the scourge of ty¬ ranny, to the iron sway of military law; her nobles, upheld by the right of con¬ quest ; her commons, bound down, and humbled, to slavery and villanage : even in peace, rapacity and outrage, stalking unhooded
unhooded through the land; troops of marauders, basked in the countenance of power and strength, ravaging in wanton voracity ; plunder and murder stealing upon tbe haunts of loneliness, and scat¬ tering the mildew of ruin and desolation! It is not for us to note the tedious route of the baron of Hanslape; to particu¬ larize the hazards and tbe difficulties in his pass into Warwickshire ; to specify the pious sanctuaries, which each night yielded him a resting-place: enough, be it, to say, that every pulse in his warm heart quickened, when he traced the rippling Anker; the spiring smoke of ???? a scattered dwelling; the grey turret« of St. Mary's, bursting from the haze of distance, spreading, growing, into reality and cognizance. The feelings of tbe son flowed over; he sprung from his horse ; he yielded the reins to the groom ; he waved back bis followers, be directed to the town of Nuneaton—then, with lowliness and conti ition, with a half-bent face,
face, and an unequal step, he struck anto tbe path winding to the monastery. Tbe last gleam ofthe sun still linger¬ ed on the storied panes : tbe west still glowed with radiance : anon, tbe orb of day vanished, and Hanslape sighed at the metaphor his reason sketched. It was bright, as the brightest pleasures of life; it was resplendent, as tbe most prosperous destiny: and like the plea¬ sures of life, and iike tbe most prospe¬ rous destiny—it was evanescent—it was fading—it passed, as a dream, from tbe senses ; it set amid clouds and gloom ! Again he sighed, and a tear dimmed his eye ; he paused ; be held in bis breath ; for the breeze, scarce felt, wafted the holy psalmody of worship :—it was the vesper-service, and the hallelujah of praise floated on the translucent air; swelled, died away, in such tender mo¬ dulations, such soft, such thrilling vi¬ brations, that luring from earth to hea¬ ven, it snatched the wrapt soul, to lap it
it in Elysium ! His hand was almost powerless, when he raised it to the bell ; for sensibility warred within, and a thou¬ sand contending feelings, combated against bis fortitude : he might be too late: his mother might have passed away : the silent rest of all flesh, might alone await his coming : it was a possi¬ ble, and a torturing apprehension : and wound to that climax, which dares the worst, he stood firm, even when the shrill peal echoed through the building. — ec I would leárn of the baroness of Hanslape," he said, in reply to the in¬ quiry of the portress. " The baroness of Hanslape," repeat¬ ed the lay-sister, and she measured him with a shrewd and scrutinizing eye; " say rather, of the sister Isabel." " Of my mother," energetically pro¬ nounced the baron, grasping her arm, forgetful of all forms and ceremonies. " The sister Isabel," resumed the por¬ tress, in all the blank apathy of rigid ob¬ servance,
servance, " now, in the chapel, pours forth her gratitude and her thanksgiv¬ ing, for a merciful and signal deliver¬ ance ! She——" At that instant, alight and sylph-like form, swift and soundless, advanced to¬ wards them : the lay-sister paused, and Hanslape gazed, as though upon a spirit of the sky. The lady Alice—for the lady Alice de Bellamont it was—had caught the words of the portress, as she crossed from the cloisters ; and although the peachy bloom of maiden bashfulness deepened on her cheek, she yielded to impulse and to feeling, " The baroness of Hanslape—the sis¬ ter Isabel," she softly articulated, " anon, will greet with joy, the perseverance and the fidelity of old Geoffry." How, in a brief season, did life vary her colouring ! how bright, how vivid, the flowers, Love scattered from his ma¬ gic wing ! not a thorn lurked beneath the roses; not a thistle cowered amid the
the sweets! Hanslape awakened to a new world—Hanslape bosomed new hopes, and new anticipations : his heart yielded to the witchery of woman ; his feelings, to the talismanic spell of fasci¬ nation ! and not until he heard of a contract, coupled with the name of Ra- nulph de Blond ville, earl of Chester, did he break from the trammels of illusion —did he awaken to less than bliss. His mother had been visited with grievous ailing, had been stricken almost unto death : she had heard of the siege of Lincoln ; of the sanguinary carnage of that eventful day ; of the expulsion of prince Louis and his followers; ofthe slaughter which had thinned the ranks of the victorious English ! Weeks and months had rolled upon each other, and no assurance of her son's safety, bad soft¬ ened the festering anguish of suspense ; in vain she had struggled ; in vain she had sought, to martyr nature, to bur¬ den Heaven with prayers, to wane the hours
hours for rest in watching and in tears : the temerity of the spirit waged dread¬ ful warfare with the flesh : but all of earth is earthly ; and long fastings, and stern and relentless penances, had en¬ tailed the actual misery of disease. It was then, in the wild flights of delirium, in the incoherent ravings of fevered fan¬ cy, that the buried gangreen had been discfosed; it was then, that the humane and sympathizing Alice, anxious to ad¬ minister an assuaging balsam to the sick soul of the being she loved aud honour¬ ed, dispatched the aged Geoffry on his mission of grace. How dangerous, is gentleness and sensibility,combined with youth and loveliness! The baron, in removing his mother's hoard of care, quick transfixed the arrow in his own breast : the calm of independence, the reign of thoughtless ease, fled, and tumultuous hopes, and wild and un¬ governable wishes, ennvded upon each other : he forgot, in the precincts of St. Mary,
Mary, tbe projected pilgrimage to Wal¬ singham; he forgot bis promise to sir Roger Mortimer, of his speedy return to Hanslape ; he forgot all, but the envi¬ ous walls, which shut him from the youthful Alice : and he hovered around those wails, and he lingered at the grate, and he tarried at Nuneaton, with a te¬ nacity, with a perseverance, inexplicable even to himself In vain, in the hours of reflection and ?????, did he seek to analyze his feelings, to mould his future actions into any thing like order : a visit to the grate of the monastery ; a glance from the bright eyes of her he loved ; and all his reflection, and all his reason, made itself " thin air, and vanished." The sudden illness of the earl of War¬ wick, and the unexpected summons of the lady Alice from Nuneaton, aroused the lover to a remembrance of a world beyond the magic circlet in which she moved : he saw her depart ; he placed her in her litter ; he traced a tear, pen¬ dent
dent on her fair cheek—like the dew-gem on the rose-bud : and he bosomed that tear—and he never lost sight of that tear—until he followed, and sought her, in Warwick Castle. He scorned dis¬ guise ; he spurned ought of collusion ; his mind was the seat of honour, and the innocent, the virgin heart of the lady Alice, was the prize he coveted, beyond all which this life could offer. Alas ! as¬ tounding was the blow which awaited his appeal to tbe earl ; be had before heard of a contract; but love is buoyant, youth sanguine : the lady Alice, almost in in¬ fancy, had been affianced to the earl of Cheater; and now did they tarry but his return from Palestine, whither, with Saher de Quincie, earl of Winchester ; William earl of Arundel ; Robert Fitz- Walter ; and divers other nobles, taking lip the cross, he had journeyed, on the mission of holiness, to perfect the com¬ pletion of the treaty. It was the pledge of honour, and Warwick mourned, but he
he could not repeal ; it was the guaranty of political faith ; and however the pa¬ rent might hesitate, the statesman re¬ mained immoveable. Petrified, aghast, Hanslape rushed from the presence of the earl, and almost unconscious of the movement, found himself beside the ta¬ pestry-loom of the gentle Alice: his face, the index of his soul, betrayed the tumult within: she dropped her needle, and she uttered a half shriek, as she glanced towards him. " The destined bride of De Blond- ville," be ejaculated, writhing in the bit» terness of disappointment Alice spoke not—she bent her head upon her bosom—she shook her bright locks over her burning face. " I have heard all," pursued the ba¬ ron ; " the emptiness of my hopes, the illusive shadow which has cheated me of my happiness : alas ! alas ! why did I not know it earlier—why did I not woo conviction, ere conviction en tailed death?; u Death!*
"Death!" echoed the maid, extend¬ ing her hand impulsively towards him. " Are you not lost to me, lady Alice ?" springing to her side, and scarcely con¬ scious of what he uttered—" have I not seen you^—do I not know you, but to deplore the perversity of my destiny ? Why, like an angel of light, did you cross my path, to cozen, to betray ?— why did y r ou not warn me of my dan¬ ger?—Avhy did you not shield me, through the acknowledged claims of the earl of Chester ?" " The earl of Chester," faltered Alice, " was far away : at Nuneaton I forgot to think of him : and if he did steal upon memory, it was as an ugly dream, wbich I strove to banish." " Yet when be returns," said Hans¬ lape. Alice turned death-sick, and bent her beautiful eyes on the ground. " Yet when he returns," repeated the baron, joying in her emotion, " the ful¬ filment
filment of the contract will be enforced." Alice only sobbed. ** Can you love him, lady Alice ?" asked Hanslape, emboldened by her agi¬ tation, and ardently perusing each varia¬ tion of her expressive features. " Love him," sobbed the maid : " alas ! he is almost as old as my father : fierce, ungentle, quite, quite repellent to confi¬ dence." " Can you marry him, lady Alice ?" " How can I help it ?" Hanslape precipitated himself at her feet. Her eye of mild inquiry, of tender appeal, eloquent in all the hidden move¬ ments of the heart, banished self-com¬ mand : in a little moment, the bosom's secrets were rifled : Hanslape felt him¬ self emparadised, for Alice loved, with a flame, as fervent, as faithful, and as last- ing as his own ! But spite of all this phalanx of security, this bosomed anti¬ dote to anxiety and to torture, a load of care grew in the dreaded return of the vol. ι. e earl
earl of Chester; and Alice, gentle and confiding, poured her griefs and her ap¬ prehensions into the ear of the lord Hen¬ ry her brother. He liked not Chester ; he sided not in the cold policy ofthe earl his father ; he esteemed Hanslape, and he pitied, and he loved his youthful sis¬ ter ; his counsel, was the counsel of in¬ experience and rashness ; it was to inva¬ lidate the contract, to pledge, secretly and solemnly, the irrevocable vow of marriage. " I will bear you through the hazard," he exclaimed—" I will brave the first brunt of your parent's wrath." " And the earl of Chester ?" asked Alice, timid and doubtful. " My spurs to a tattered gabardine," repüed the venturous De Bellamont, " that he sink not beneath the load of his injuries. Marry, had he loved you, my pretty Alice, he would not have gone on pilgrimage, and left you to pine alone ! " The dangers, and the hazards, of such
such an enterprise, are appalling," mur¬ mured Alice ; " perchance ------" she he¬ sitated, and her eyes, rather than her lips, concluded—" perchance he may ne¬ ver return." " Then may angels waft him to a brighter land," rejoined De Bellamont, laughing. " God's truth ! I would wish him a long life, my girl, did he not cross your peace : let him yield the palm ; let him annul the bond of cold-hearted po¬ licy; and though he journey through every quarter of the habitable globe, may prosperous breezes waft his sails, and bliss gild him with her sunshine !"
E 2 CHAP-
CHAFTER IV
+#+*■+*■*#^^+++^^4'*^r*é^
•Fate is in thy voice,
And awe-fraught prophecy, in every word Thou breathest." Summoned to aid in the annual solem¬ nities of Christmas, the baron of Hans¬ lape, and the volatile heir of the earl of Warwick, joined the court of the youth¬ ful monarch at Winchester. Peace then shed throughout the land her mild and genial beams ; the turbulence of faction and discontent, lay brooding, hid, like internal fires, and close muffled within the guise of conciliation. Forgetful of his own barony, of his pledged word to sir Roger Mortimer, of every tie, save love ; forgetful of the absent Chester— clinging but to the cherished smile of the idolized Alice, Hanslape returned to
to Warwick Castle, to dare the hazard, to live within the zenith of fascination. His arguments were subtle ; his reason¬ ing fallacious ; his honour and his prin¬ ciples, close hoodwinked by the sophis¬ try of the heart : Alice, sacrificed to po¬ licy, was as a bleeding suffering martyr ; it was humanity, it was common feel¬ ing, to save her from a fate so inauspi¬ cious: Chester too was the cold com¬ puting speculatisi : had hw· loved, not to have snatched a relic of the true cross, could he, in such a season, have quitted his affianced bride. Thus, with a will¬ ing mind, and a perverted judgment, did the baron serve his apprenticeship to Cupid's calling : the lady Alice too was happy, because she heard not of the dreaded Chester, and because, she saw tbe mere liking of her brother and her lover ripen into friendship: all was smooth, calm, and unruffled: the earl of Warwick was convalescent ; and often did the arm of Hanslape support hini on E 3 the
the terrace ; often, wooing him back to health and strength, did he move by the side of his palfrey, or aiding in the efforts of filial interest, tend him in the light barge, scudding down the softly-stealing Avon. No more was the hndestine bond of marriage urged ; no more, did the lord Henry advise a rite so conclu¬ sive: difficulty, perplexity, and care, warred not with the bosom's peace : it was retained as a last> expedient, in case of inauspicious circumstances ; for what more could the lover crave, beyond the presence of his mistress, the smile of her father, and the favour of her brother ? An era of content and bliss cheated him into quietude, and futurity, unmixed with bitterness, shone bright as the un¬ clouded giory of the heavens : he loved, and he saw himself beloved: the dis¬ tance, the hazards of a voyage, so long; the dangers of clime, the die of casual¬ ties, all poised the scale of his fortune— Chester might never return—Chester, in
in the land of promise, might find a grave ; and Alice, freed from all engage¬ ment—Alice------His pulse quickened, his very brain grew dizzy in the thought : the illusions of fancy, only reaching the head, are often brilliant and misleading meteors ; 'tis those, which play around the heart, which are gleams of the joy of other worlds ! Hanslape saw himself, tbe accepted, the courted husband of the lady Alice ; and he forgot, in the instant, tbat his foundation-stone of felicity, rest¬ ed on the fall of another : hurried away by feeling, he forgot the example of bis self-sacrificing mother ; he forgot, that the rose bears the thorn; he forgot pas¬ sion to be the universal quicksand, en- gulphing tbe hopes and the innocence of youth! Tbe genial breath of May, wafting sweet odours, and freighted with many a spicy gale, shooting forth her buds and her blossoms, spread the rich earnest of coming favour, when from the joys, Hanslape was roused to the woes, to e 4 the
the vain securities, to the unsubstantial shadows of all sublunary things : he was summoned on an errand, which put to flight, every vestige of cheerfulness ; it was to witness the pass of the spirit—it was to receive the last sigh of his exem¬ plary guardian, the protector, William earl of Pembroke. He journeyed to London, and he read the impressive les¬ son of mortality; he felt, as says the Psalmist, that all flesh is as grass ; thut the brightest flower of the field, may be blasted by too rough a wind, or too hot a sun ; he traced the air-bubble, which man calls happiness ; he aided in the so¬ lemn rites of sepulture; he saw the ho¬ noured clay, deposited in the church of the Knights-Templars (6), and he re¬ turned, for a brief season, to muse on his own insignificance. Upon the grave of the noble Pembroke, of the counsellor and the hero, the pledged pilgrimage to Walsingham revived, bringing with it reproach and self-arraingment : he mused over
over his engagement to sir Roger Mor¬ timer; and enervated by grief, and som- bered by reflection, he rose not from his knees, until his heart and his lips, shaped into a vow, the mere promise he had uttered. As he passed from the church, a quick step broke upon the stillness ; a hand grasped his, and a voice pronounced, remember I The face was half muffled; and it was pale, and it was saddened, by the deepening sha¬ dows of twilight Hanslape struggled, but he could not break from the firm hold. " Who are you ?" he demanded, paus¬ ing and wondering. " One of this world," replied the stranger ; " a witness of your vow ; a man, a sinner, like unto yourself; a fel¬ low-labourer in the vineyard ; a militant soldier of the cross, through privation and endurance ; a humble candidate for hereafter blessedness ; a rigid disciple of E 5 the
the rule of St. Bernard—a Knight-Tem¬ plar." " And why seek to bar my passage?" asked the baron, á again wrestling for free¬ dom. " To breathe a wholesome truth into your ear," replied the intruder; " to tell you, that vows to heaven, savour not of the vows qfthis world; however the one be broken with impunity; the other, entaileth a weighty reprisal." " Death ?" asked Hanslape, shudder¬ ing beneath the sudden chill of the hearts-blood. " Worse than death," pursued the Templar : " ruin to hope, ruin to peace, ruin to felicity. Remember the grave of the earl-marshal—remember the fast of St Dunstan—remember the church of the Knights-Templars—remember your vow» and sleep not upon its fulfilment." " My vow^—what vow ?" and Hans¬ lape trembled as he spoke. He was venturous in the field ; he was brave, even
even to rashness; but he was strongly tainted with the superstition of the age in which he lived, and he beheld the being at his side—not as a joint heir of woe and death—but as the incorporeal, the sin-cleansed spirit of another w r orld : a thick film gathered before his eyes ; a universal tremour crept through his veins ; his nerves felt to relax ; his very knees to bend in inability. " Have you so soon forgotten the pledge, yet warm upon your lips?" re¬ joined the stranger : " tarry then, and brave the penalty : and when you writhe beneath the pressure of evil, then seek me here, in the church of the Knights- Templars ; and if I live, I will tell you again, that vows to heaven, savour not ofthe vows qfthis world" He ceased—he relinquished his hold —Hanslape staggered back; he clung for a moment to the butment of one of the pillars ; and when he revived to ex¬ ertion and to consciousness, when again e 6 the
the powers of voice returned, the Tem¬ plar was no longer beside him. A deep, an unbroken stillness reign¬ ed : he looked back into the church, but no shadow darkened the aisles, no sound bore intimation of a living being: his eyes fell upon the new-made grave of Pembroke, and his heart again melted into softness: fear, and agitation, and doubt, faded like mists before the beams of morning : he recalled the known phi¬ lanthropy, the mild beneficence, tbe no¬ ble virtues of his departed guardian ; his usefulness in the state ; his pru¬ dence, his zeal, his self-forbearance, at the helm of power : every feeling teem¬ ed with his memory ; every sorrow be¬ tokened of his own loss : and not until he pictured the rich inheritance vouch¬ safed the righteous, the promised para¬ dise of hereafter blessedness, did the warm glow of enthusiasm dry up the heart-wrung tears of humanity. Long after he had parted from the mourning
mourning widow, and the sons of him he had loved and lost, did the warning counsels of the mysterious Templar haunt his imagination : every duty seemed secondary to the duty of holi¬ ness : Alice, in all the bloom of her loveliness ; " white as the driven snow ; sweet as the breathing gale !" yielded to the necessary fulfilment of his volun¬ tary vow : to be worthy the pure hea¬ ven of her love, he must bend his lowly steps to the shrine of the Virgin Mother at Walsingham ; he must deposit his gifts upon the altar, and return, absolv¬ ed and purified, through prayer and pe¬ nance. It was the name of the earl of Chester—it was tbe remembrance of the earl of Chester, which hung like a blast upon his feelings—the earl of Chester, whose rights he had subverted; who, whilst toiling out his sanctification on the burning shores of Palestine, was by him, cozened of his hopes and of his trust—the earl of Chester might re- turn,
turn, and then would his curse fall like molten lead upon the head of the de- spoiler ; his curse would be the curse of one accepted ; it would gnaw, it would fester, it would turn to gangrene; it wouid be the curse of one, who had laid down his own burden of sin, at the holy sepulchre of the crucified Jesus. The possibility, the bare anticipation, stirred every warring passion within him ; alternately, was he the saint, the martyr, the man ; now dedicating his life to holiness ; now, sacrificing all to honour; now, the slave, the yielding, unresisting slave, to mere feeling. He would return no more to Warwick Cas¬ tle ; he would dare no more the spell of her perfections; he would seek out Mor¬ timer ; he would buckle on the girdle of penance ; he would deprecate divine wrath ; he would mourn his lapse from rectitude, in sackcloth and in ashes. But alas ! the resolutions of a lover are engraven on sand : like shadows on the bosom
bosom of the deep, one ray of unobscu¬ red sunshine effaces their very being! The tempter assailed in the form of the lord Henry de Bellamont : he came freighted with joy and gratulation ; for his friend, and his most intimate asso¬ ciate, Hubert de Burgh, the new jus¬ ticiary of England, bad confidently an¬ nounced the death of Ranulph earl of Chester. In a land, purified and sprink¬ led by the blood of martyrs and of saints; a land, consecrated as tbe birthplace of Christianity, he had laid down the bur¬ den of life ; he bad died, with the cross yet ungrasped; but with tbe pure flame of zeal, glowing, spreading within his breast, spiring, as a bright pharos, to¬ wards heaven ! " Peace be with him !" exclaimed Hanslape, vainly struggling down the rapturous sensations which crowded on his heart " And joy with us !" pronounced the lord Henry, in a tone, and with a look of
of mock gravity. " God wot, but for Alice, I would he had numbered the days of Methuselah : as it is, I can find no «room for woe !" " And what says my lord of War¬ wick ?" asked the baron. " Marry ! he is a true Christian, and submits manfully to the vicissitudes of time and chance," laughingly respond¬ ed De Bellamont : " but he will say, thou art a lazy lout, if thou sufferest the moon to wane upon their solitude. Bestir thee, man : vault into the stir¬ rup : ride sturdily ; ride with the wind ; chase the tears from the bright eyes of thy mistress, lest murmuring at thy tardiness, she seek another comforter," " What says the earl?" again urged Hanslape. " Pshaw ! pshaw ! dally, and lose the prize. The earl, forsooth ! what has the earl to do with a lover's haste? who thinks of earls, when beauty's in the balance? Follow thy own counsels, and
and let the maid slip through thy fin¬ gers : yield the helm to my pilotage, and by the gage of chivalry, I will steer thee into a safe harbour !" The baron smiled, as he clasped the extended palm of his gay friend.— " What seernest thee best fitting?" he questioned. " I would woo, but not scare the virgin bashfulness of thy angel sister." " Woo her, and win her," pursued lord Henry : " but woo her, as women best love to be wooed ; with ardour, with homage, with enthusiasm : wait not, until the road be straight and even ; rather, break the barrier, and leap the fence." " I trow, thou art a strange wild be¬ ing," said Hanslape. " Belike ; yet well versed in the sex's sickly humours. I know all their whims, and their freaks, from the coroneted countess, down to the malapert tirewo¬ man." " Well,
" Well, and what then ?" " Why then, I WOuld speed thee to Warwick Castle, and bend thee at the feet of Alice : make hay, man, beneath a cloudless sunshine. Away ! away ! dally not, for time is brief, and fate un¬ certain." Impelled by '\e sharpened spur of inclination—intoxicated by the brain- steeping sway of mystic love, the baron plunged into the dizzy current of over¬ whelming passion ; he stemmed not tbe vortex; he struggled not against the stream; he yielded himself to circum¬ stances and to feeling; and instead of returning into Buckinghamshire, instead of treading the track of self-enjoined penance—he forgot his promised pilgri¬ mage to Walsingham—he forgot sir Roger Mortimer—he forgot the solemn injunction of the Knight-Templar ;—he remembered but the witchery of the lady Alice : and soon, within the fairy- circle of her smile, he resigned himself to
to that influence, which so often, and so fatally, besots the judgment. The era of courtship was brief and balmy : for however the head may compute by days and weeks, tbe calendar ofthe heart, is a calendar of moments ; moments, so soft, so bright, so subtle, so seductive, they are as the grains of gold in the sand of the hourglass—they are, as the lightest down on the pinions of Time! Every sigh was spontaneous; every wish re¬ ciprocai : life appeared naught but hope and promise; futurity, tranced in the ether of illusion.
tJLJ.XA.1. -
CHAPTER V. ■ This man f s brow, like to a title-leaf, Foretells the nature of a tragic volume. Shakespeare, Aurora scattered from her rosy fingers, all of beauty and of splendour, as the bridal party moved from the chapel: the sun shone on the broad bold battle¬ ments of the castle, and the Avon, rip¬ pling beneath, seemed as though swell¬ ing with the freightage of their length¬ ened shadows. Vivid and gay were the tints of vegetation, spreading in rich perspective, dappling the emerald garb of nature, and luring the excursive eye with a thousand wild and pictu¬ resque varieties: woods, and pastures, and corn-fields, and meandering sheets of silver, and hamlets, and belfrys, and cottages,
cottages, lay huddled in the vale below ; for the steep bleak rock, upon which the castle bulged, towered the giant monarch ofthe prospect. The virgin bride, blush¬ ed sweetly through her veil of snow; andthebedight and buoyant bridegroom, smiled, and bowed, with exultation and with rapture, as the heartfelt benison of many an age-bent domestic greeted his ear. It was an epocha of bliss, too extatic to last ; too bright, too etherial for earth ! the mind, the very spirit, lay tranced in Elysium : not a care, not a doubt, not a single sign of inquietude, savouring ought of mortality ! Three whole days were given to festivity and to merriment : the buttery groaned with good cheer; and wassailry and mirth rang through bower and hall; tilting and hawking yielded to the dance and the revel, and the lowest vassal, in jest and in song, aped but the glee of the noble. On the close of the third even, whilst yet
yet the sun lingered in his transit, tip¬ ping each tree and spire with burnished gold, a clamorous blast of a bugle, pier¬ cing and shrill, and drawing many a lengthened echo, bespoke the advance of a stranger. The jest vanished, and the silence of expectation prevailed : the youthful baroness impulsively sprung to the side of Hanslape : the earl of War¬ wick, half, raised himself in his chair of state; and De Burgh, and the lord Henry, and the assembled guests, faced the door of entrance. A parley was heard, and the next instant, a knight, in sad-coloured vestments, strode into the hall : a palmer's cloak half veiled his sable mail ; and in lieu of a plume, an escalop shell crested his closed morion : he stood for a^moment, silently viewing the gay revellers, and then he moved towards the earl of Warwick. His pace was slow ; his tread heavy ; still he spoke not, but folding his arms, and bending his head upon his breast, seemed as though
though manfully wrestling with his feel¬ ings. " What bodes this mummery ?" asked the earl, wondering and doubtful. The stranger drew off his gauntlet, and cast it on the floor ; then holding forth his hand, he displayed a signet-ring upon his fourth finger. It bore the crest of the house of Warwick ; the wy vern, and the motto, Garde la fay : it was the parting bond of honour and of faith, bestowed on the earl of Chester. " In de"* h — De Blondville relinquished it in death," faltered the earl, starting and trembling, and his cheeks and his very lips waxed bloodless. " De Blondville cherished it in life- bears it in life," sternly pronounced the stranger. " De Blondville," repeated Warwick, and the loud shriek of the baroness rang through the hall. " Bears it in life," pursued the stran¬ ger, casting off his muffling guise, and unclasp-
unclasping the rivets of his helmet: " behold in me, Ranulph de Blondville, earl of Chester." Again Alice shrieked in maddened terror; and twining her arms around the neck of her lord, buried her face in his bosom,-—" I come, not to upbraid, or to avenge," said Chester, mournfully : " fear me not, lady—I corne, but to seek out the base and traitorous knave, who by a false fabri¬ cation, despoils me of my bride : let him stand forth ; and though he be of gentle blood, though he be of royal lineage, yet will I hurl the lie back into his coward throat." De Burgh sprung from the restraining arm of the lord Henry : proudly indig¬ nant, he snatched up the gauntlet, held it disdainfully for a moment, then tram¬ pled it beneath his feet. The clash of arms, the death-dealing grapple ensued ; all was uproar and dismay, till violence, not persuasion, separated the comba¬ tants. Alas ! in that fatal error, in that dire
dire mistake, a feud, through life, en¬ gendered. It was Saher de Quincie, earl of Winchester, who had died em pilgrimage to the holy land; and tbe chance communication, the mere misre¬ presentation of the justiciary, stirred all of gall within the breast of Chester: they lived in mutual hate, in open enmity : and spite of the lavish favour of Henry the Third, who a few years after, created Hubert de Burgh earl of Kent, the aim of malice, and the poison of rancour, never slumbered. It was as an internal fire, burning, and spreading, and raging, and lacking but the counter-current of opportunity, to make the explosion the more deadly. Chester had—did love the young and beauteous Alice ; and he bore to the court, and into the field, and into solitude, the fester of blighted hope. The baron of Hanslape was first awakened from his trance of peace and bliss by the turbulent rebellion of Wil· vol. i. f liam
liam de Fortibus earl of Albemarle, who, w T ith horse and with arms, plundering the towns of Tenham and Deeping, and despoiling the black canons of Brid¬ lington of their grain and their stores, entrenched himself in his castle of Bi¬ ham, and set at naught, all of authority and regal rule. He had before been the leader of a bold faction : and now, the very spirit of disaffection and civil dis¬ cord spoke in his movements ; for sum¬ moned to Westminster, before the king and the council, he secretly withdrew himself to the castle of Fotheringbay r , in Northamptonshire, then held by the justiciary, and garrisoning it with sol¬ diers, and sedulously fortifying it against assault, he returned to Biham Castle to blow the trump of defiance. It was loyalty, it was courage, it was zeal for the public weal, which drew Hanslape from his home of security ; he left the baroness in Buckinghamshire, nurturing the new-born heir of his honours, and heading
heading his retainers, he hastened to the standard of the royal Henry. It was bis first hour of separation from the wife of his bosom, and he felt it, and he mourned it, with grief of heart; but tbe call of duty was imperative, and wedded to legitimate monarchy, he viewed ought of infringement with a jealous eye. The reduction of Biham Castle, the return of tbe earl of Albemarle to his allegiance, tbe king's clemency, and the speedy disbandonment of the rebel force, gave promise of re-dawning peace : but the ray was brief as April sunshine ; for an incursion of the Welch quick succeeded, and in lieu of seeking the coveted haven of domestic tranquillity, he hastened with the royal army to the succour of the castle of Buelt, forced Llewellyn, king of Wales, to raise the siege, and fly back into his own territory, captured the town of Montgomery, and ere he revisited his barony of Hanslape, wit¬ nessed the marriage of Hubert de Burgh, F 2 belted
belted eari of Kent, with the princess Margaret, sister to Alexander king of Scots» The arrival of the baron at the castle ofhis heritage, wr commemorated witb rejoicings and with mirth ! Alice, doubly beloved in the tender pledge she had given him, smiled upon his endear¬ ments: she saw him fondle the infant Hehry, and her heart felt no room for increased felicity : she was happy—happy äs innocence and prosperity could war¬ rant ; happy in his affection—happy in his confidence: not a wish ungratified, not a murmur, not a sigh, bearing ear¬ nest of a single ill : hand in hand, they traversed a path teeming with vivid flowers ; they heard of trials, they heard of sorrows ; but the sun of their own gay destinies, knew not the shadow of a single cloud ! Time g-ave another son to their loves, and often would they sit, and mark, witii delighted transport, the contrast of infancy
infancy and agei—in tbe sportive gam^ bob of the little brothers, and thjs gri?* ^led locks and furrowed brows of the watchful and the fajthfvd Geoffry. " Lady, gracious lady," would arti¬ culate the hoary dome ie, * I æe ??? rich in woman's best blessings, and ï tow down to the grave in peace." ??? then he would smile upon the daring freaks of the agile Henry ; and then he would aid and bless the pigmy efforts of the aspiring William. But alas ! joy is not the inheritance of tnan :—it may dawn, and it may dazzle for ? ?????? ; but the tempest broods, the storni ga¬ thers, and desolation and chastening ills arise : all of flesh, is flesh ; all of earth, k earthly ; we walk in a vain shadow, and the harvest of our deeds is woe ! Un¬ broken peace reigned througnout the ?????; the turbulence of faction lay hushed, or rather, the ripening projects of the disaffected barons, marked not the moment of issue ; a long lapse of f 3 quietude
quietude lulled all alike into security; tbe king mingled with his nobles ; the wassail-song echoed through the hall, and the joust and the tilt-yard tokened of mimic warfare : zeal too reaped a teeming harvest; fbr advices from Pa¬ lestine, received through the prior of the Knights-Templars, spoke of the resti¬ tuted relics of the true cross;—the city of Damiata had yielded to the Christian arms, and the sultan of Babylon had fled before the united prowess of the king of Jerusalem and the duke of Austria. Praise, and gratitude, and thanksgiv¬ ing, rose in loud acclaim ; the churches rang with hosannas to the Highest ; and the Jubilate, the Te Deum, and the Magnificat, spoke the fervour of holi¬ ness: a delirium, wild, genera*, and overwhelming; a blind fanaticism, ? misjudging zeal, tranced every spirit : a poll-tax, granted in common council, for the further succour of the holy land, was
was paid without a murmur—for every eye, seeking the east, hailed the burnish of a glorious day ! Hanslape, from his long dream of negligence, was awakened by the mad enthusiasm of the laity: five years had transpired, since, in the church of the Knights-Templars, he had made the vow of pilgrimage to Wal¬ singham ; and still was the offering un¬ prepared, was the sacrifice unperfected : a pang at the heart, told him he had neglected a first duty ; a sickening shud¬ der, arising in the consciousness of wrong. He sought the presence of the baroness; he found her toying with her sons, her kirtle disordered, herliead-gear displaced, her beautiful hair straying down her shoulders—her cheeks, out- glowing the roses, the rude and wanton urchins had scattered. The gambol a$d the laugh ceased. Alice deciphered care on tbe brow of her lord, and quick dismissing the chil¬ dren, soon rifled the buried mine of his f 4 inquietude.
inquietude. She softened all of self- reproach ; she parried every rising mur¬ mur : the honeyed drop in life's bitter cup, her smiles and her caresses, lured him back to peace. " Tarry," she softly whispered, her arms encircling ?? neck, her blushing face half hid in his bosom, " until a new candidate claim our love; and then ------" " What then, my Alice?" " If a boy," she pursued, " do with bim as you list : if a girl, De Maudit, she must be called after the nun of St. Mary ; and God send, she prove as good and as true a Christian !" " Isabel," said Hanslape. " Yes, Isabel, the name of her ho¬ noured grandam : and then, dearest, we will together to Walsingham ; for I too, would fain offer some token of gratitude for all my hoard of blessings." " You," fearfully and tenderly: " think of the distance; think, my best love, of the haidîhood** Alice
Alice smiled.—* ï wmiâ $?$ ??? dangers as ??? 1 pleasures," φ® ^??????- ed ; ? but øf this anon : tørry my Hå- ding í I pray »o betier courtesy t w Wækjs succeeded» ?? $? ????? tvmü to süence every rising repr<^çh ι he se¬ dulously observed bis ?£%??? duties-r- kept tiie %t£—attended late md s$r]y in the chapel-rr-dirtributed atøis-^ofi- sulted his cwfeasor^^shrivçd his con- mieme —performed his expiatory ??- nances-~and on his knees received tb? peace-yielding eucharkt; yet ñ røounj of leøa preyed ??? his ¿spirits, rød evep the presence of Alice and her boy$, failed to restom his native cheerfulness. May had scattered her buds and h^r blossoim, jand every mead, ømå every copse-wood, shone bedight in her garish livery ; ¿he blasts rf winter were hushed små gone, and -creation teemed with the ridi earnests of «coming favour. It wag the €mt of St Dunstm, the amiiv^mry øf the burial of the ^u-1-marslial, ???- f 5 lape,
lape, alone and lonely, walked from the castle, his eyes fixed upon the glories of day, fast fading in the west, his thoughts, upon bis visit to the grave of Pembroke, upon the mysterious intervention of the Knight-Templar. He mused, and he sorrowed as he mused ; involuntarily his steps turned to the chapel, and he paused beneath the deep and sepulchral shadow of the close inclustering branch¬ es; he pushed open the door, and he entered the aisle. It was a spot to woo sad fancies; a spot, inhuming the dust of his ancestors, enriched and decorated with armor :il bearings and trailing ban¬ ners—the spoils of past glory—the fading relics of mortal prowess! A dread, gen¬ dered in superstition and bigotry, stole over him ; an indefinable presentiment of evil, icing his tifeblood, drove the circling eddy back upon his heart : be thought of his broken vow, of his long neglected pilgrimage to the shrine of the Virgin Mother at Walsingham, and courage
courage and confidence misgave him ; he felt that calamity would be but a scourge drawn upon himself: fancy pic¬ tured the form of the Knight-Templar, and the deep-toned voice again seemed to utter, Vows to heaven, savour not of the votes of this world I —" Ah me ! ah me !" he articulated, clasping his hands in despair, " I have provoked the judg¬ ment, and I must pay the tax. Grant, mighty God, it reach me not in the form of Alice, or our babes !" As he spoke, he dropped upon his knees, and resting his bead against the low tracery of one of the shrines, re¬ mained absorbed, communing with his own heart, labouring to appease the almost maddened tumult in his feelings, A sudden, a piercing, an astounding shriek, dissipated the stillness ; a shriek, and such a shriek ; it noted the anguish of a tortured spirit ! One spring, one bound, and Hanslape cleared the cha¬ pel; he broke through the coppice ; he f 6 glanced
glsunced an eagle eye around: he beheld his own Alice nishing towards the base ofthe warderVtower;—he beheld, poised upon the balustrade of the outer parapet of the wardets-tower, the hardy, the dauntless Henry, the heir of his honours, the first-born pledge of his love ! No cry—no groan escaped him: it was a moment of fate, of awe-fraught feeling: a moment, teeming with mad- ness and with death ; the like impulse, the like propelling agony urged liim forward ; he leaped the brakes and bram¬ bles ; he met the frantic baroness at the base of tbe warder's-tower—he met her, in the self-same instant, wdiich stretched the ill-starred Henry, a mangled corse at bis feet There are circumstances, there are trials, there are appalling üls, chequering this our mortal pilgrimage, whose effects upon the human heart, defying delinea¬ tion, cripple all powers of language! Such was the dire catastrophe, whidi like
like a blast, fell upon the smiling bøtes of Hanslape, devastating all his pro¬ mises, and steeping the remnant of his life in tears ! The baroness lay by the side of the lost Henry, stone-cold and motionless; her face, her bosom, sprinkled with his lifeblood; her eyes closed; her every feature as still and as calm, as though death, passing from his bosom to hers, had claimed a double victim : but her trance alas ! was short and flitting ; lier calm, like tlie dire pause, preceding the din of the world-rocking thunder: she awoke to memory and to cognizanoe; and shrieks and struggles, and wild and terrifying convulsions, succeeded, In vain the wretched husband wept and prayed; in vain, he strained her in his amts ; in vain, lie hid the torture of his own lieart ; in vain, for his mke, for the sake of the little William, be besought ???????: day waned in dagger and in woe: other pains m>wded øn the peril:
peril; towards morning, the baroness gave birth to a seven-months' child ; and ere the set of the next day's sun, Hans¬ lape steeped in tears of almost mortal anguish, the unconscious features of a motherless girt Dreadful, annihilating was the stroke ; deep, unbroken the blank: as one be¬ reaved of sanity and power, the wretched widower viewed the mighty ruin: he stood by the bier; he gazed on the 'ivid features of her who was " his souls food" —on the nipped and witheud blossom which had been his heir : not a groan, not a murmur escaped him ; marbled to stone, he folded his arms upon his breast, fbr he felt as though the grasp of death lay cold at his heart. " My lord—my honoured master— how has this ruin come upon us?—how have we provoked this fatal scourge?" It was the voice of Geoffry ; he looked up, and he beheld the grizzled head, bending over J;he coffin of the baroness. " Ob,
" Oh, that I were there, in thy stead !" sobbed the aged man. u Oh, that the ripe ear had been cropped—that the green ear had been spared !" Conviction felt to flash upon the scared brain of Hanslape: his start, his look was frenzy.—** It is I—it is I, who \ave provoked the scourge," he ejaculated— " it is I, who have seared up the tide of mercy. Oh God ! oh God ! it is I, who have murdered wife and child !" Deadly r , and irreversible was the im¬ pression: Hanslape had neglected the pilgrimage to Walsingham ; and Hans¬ lape, instigated by the superstition of the age. felt himself stricken by the re¬ tributive hand of Heaven. It was on the fast of St. Dunstan, in the church of the Knights-Templars, that he had pronounced the vow!—It was on the fast of St. Dunstan, that the rich spring of his sublunary joys had been blasted by calamity! A long and dangerous fever stretched him in weakness and inaction ;
he lay insensible to the presence of re¬ latives and friends; tended by tbe fathers of the ehureh; lacing alike reason and exertion ; apmtroptiigiog the freed spirit of her he loveds hailing her voice in the nigh threes; conjuring her form amid the silvery streams of moonshine ; now supplicating her to tarry his coming; noir invoking her in accents of softest endearment. Two whole years wore away, and the returns of «anity, were bright, sudden, and transitory ; like the sun upon the thunder-cloud* struggling and shining, anon yielding to obscurity and to horror. It was a fearful vacilla¬ tion of the senses ; it was a dreary blank, recording naught of past or present !
CHAP-
CHAPTER VI.
What is this world ? Thy school, oh misery ! Om* only lesbon is to learn to »utìfer , And he who knows not that, was boiu for nothing. Young, The revolving fast of St Dunstan again tipped the turrets of Hanslape with a golden burnish; the god of day darted his effulgent beams askaunt the storied panes, and the huge walls, and the em¬ battled towers, caught alike the broad full glare of splendour. The baron start¬ ed from moody abstraction ; he had been pacing, as lie was wont, the gloomy hall of his heritage ; and he paused in the cen¬ tre, and he looked wistfully in the face of the ever-attentive Geoffry. " It is long," he said, " since the lady Alice speeded you from Nuneaton. The sun
sun shone thus gaily, when I spied out your limping step and jaded gait." " True, my lord ; but you soon gave me succour, and cured all my weariness." fc * I remember it well," resumed Hans¬ lape, breathing a shuddering sigh. " Had I, from Nuneaton, visited Walsingham ; bad I deposited my gifts on the step of the altar, all might have been well : but I have armed the fiend against me ; and my Alice, and my babe——" He ceased, and he cast on heaven, a look of the deepest dejection. Geoffry raised his hand to dash away the blinding tear.—" It is of the future we must think and speak—not of the past, my dear lord," he exclaimed. " And w by not of the past, old man ?" asked the baron. " I have much to mourn, but naught to learn. I know that Alice and her boy are inhumed in the cold earth—I know that William and Isabel are spared, perchance to bless me." " God grant it !" aspirated Geoffry, in
in an accent, and with a look of such piercing fervour, that it sank from the ear to the soul of the mourner. " Your faith, and your zeal, is com¬ forting," faltered the baron ; and he ex¬ tended bis hand, and his eyes overflowed, Geoffry snatched it—he bent his knee^— he kissed it, as though it were a relic of the saints, " My crime has been blind and wilful negligence," pursued Hans¬ lape, regardless of his emotion, " and heavy is the penalty. I computed hap¬ piness, as ifit would last forever : though warned by a being of another world, I forgot all that I ought to have remem¬ bered ; and now, I have lost all that mv heart most prized." ít Not all—say not all, my lord : the promising William—-the beautiful Isa¬ bel !" Again the baron burst into tears,— " Wretched, wretched children ! how know we, but in ye are spared the scourge to punish." With
With a mind thus impressed, the re* turning strength of the body dissipated not the corroding mildew of superstition : Hanslape revived to power and to ac¬ tion ; but Hanslape lived the slave of self-reproach : a gloomy, a morbid cast of care and thoughtfulness, cramped all his vigour; he mused on the blessings he had lost, and he accused himself as the graceless murderer of his own felici¬ ty* Tinged with the fearful colouring, whkh alike pervaded the king and the beggar, he flew to the spiritual counsel of the church : he cased himself in sack¬ cloth ; he scattered ashes upon his head ; he bound his loins in a penance-girdle ; he humbled himself, even as the worm which erawleth : but not on the cold stone, watching, and wailing, and martyr¬ ing the inward man, could he lose sight of the supposed vision who had warn¬ ed him in the church of the Knights- Templars.^—** Vows to heaven, savour not ofthe vows of this world" he would pronounce,
pronounce, and then he would pray for strength and ability, to drag himself to the distant shrine of the Virgin Mother at Walsingham. " If I can live to ful¬ fil my pilgrimage," he would exclaim, in reply to the soothing remonstrances of the sympathizing Geoffry, ** my heart may be lightened, my expiation may mercifully be received." The summon¬ ing sir Roger Mortimer, the once volun¬ tary candidate in the like mission of ho¬ liness, was the sole delay which impa¬ tience and ardent zeal would admit. Hanslape watched for his arrival, with a mind, surcharged and labouring; with an expectation, eager and anxious ; yet when he did arrive, he fled from the long- courted interview, and with the incon¬ sistency of true grief, shut himself up for whole hours in the solitude of his oratory. Tbe meeting was, as is the meeting of long-separated friends—it opened the floodgates of sorrow—-it rived every pang of
of memory. Mortimer had passed the years of separation, alternately in active service and in pleasurable pastime; he had served in the wars of Ireland and Wales; he had aided in bringing to sub¬ jection the king of Connaught, in curb¬ ing the proud spirit of prince Llewellyn and his followers, in the dismantlement of the castles of A berti vie and Cardigan : from thence, passing with the royal forces into Poitou, he had zealously maintain¬ ed, with stress of arms, the glory of the British lion. A thousand incidents, pass¬ ed, and unnoted by the ascetick mourn¬ er, were sedulously and humorously narrated : anecdotes of the court and the courtiers ; of the king's blind and la¬ vish favour; of the ingratitude of indi¬ viduals ; of the force of party ; of the darings of earth-born pride. For a brief season, Hanslape forgot the weight of bis sorrows; he beheld the same light-hearted being, whom he had long known, and long esteemed, more staid
staid in years, but not in habits ; with a cheek, deeper bronzed, but with a na¬ ture alike volatile.—" Ever the same," he murmured, marking the vagrant smile curling the nether lip of the knight. " Aye, and at your bidding," respond¬ ed Mortimer, courteously and good-hu¬ mouredly bowing : " pilgrim or soldier, in amice or in steel, alike your friend." Hanslape grasped the band extended ; be recalled the hour of first engagement, and bis heart and his spirit drooped. " Know you not," pursued Mortimer, willing to change the bent of his ideas, 44 tbatPandulpb, the pope's legate, craves new subsidies ; and that zeal and holi¬ ness again rages throughout the land Τ sí And tbe king?" asked the baron. :i The king himself," replied the knight, * r is half saint ! What, if he were to tread in the steps of the mili¬ tant Richard ! When I saw him at Can¬ terbury, in the cathedral church, aiding with his own hand, in the solemn trans¬ lation
lation of the martyred Becket, from his stone coffin into his rich shrine of gold and gems, I coulel but think how holi¬ ness became royalty !" (c) " Holiness is man's best stav," said the baron : " whether be wear a torn gabardine, or whether he be decked in imperial purple, 'tis his surest prop, 'tis his firmest dependence/' " Doubtless, our august Henry judges so likewise," rejoined sir Roger : " for scarce did he pass from the episcopal see, when I beheld him in Westminster, lav- ing the first stone of tbe chapel of St. Mary." (d) " God grant the calling of grace die not!" ejaculated Hanslape. " And yet, methinks," remarked Mortimer, " the times needeth more than prayer. By the rood, if ? <-» meet not Albemarle, Warren, Gloucester, Here¬ ford, Ferrars, and Chester, with cold Da¬ mascus-steel, we may yield up our crown and sceptre !" " Chester !"
** Chester !" repeated the baron, thrill¬ ing with a thousand sad and torturing remembrances. " Know r you not, Chester is the sworn foe of the earl of Kent ?" '* Ah !" said Hanslape, ** but Chester is too noble to become the assassin of his own honour." " Chester, in league with the refrac¬ tory barons, stickles for the fulfilment of the great charter," pursued Mortimer. u Chester hates De Burgh ; and Ches¬ ter would needs buckle his revenge upon the outward seeming of public good." ** Not so—not so," eagerly exclaimed the baron. <s I know f the fatal feud, the mortal seed of contention—I know the thorn which galls the breast of Chester ; and though alas ! it has passed away, the sting, and the festering venom, lingers." " What mean you ?" demanded the knight, and attentively he listened to a recital, which probed every wound of the heart-rived widower. vol, í. g tí It
" It may be so," thoughtfully observed Mortimer; " yet should I rather suspect, a public, than a private wrong. Chester joins in loud complaint against the mal¬ versations of the justiciary; and the justiciary has been openly upheld by the king." " Has been," repeated Hanslape, his eyes, rather than his tongue, suing for explanation. " The earl, or fame is a liar," pursued sir Roger, t; is less in favour than here¬ tofore : the voice ofthe kingdom gathers against him, in half-smothered murmurs and petty complaints ; he has laboured for the supremacy of regal power ; and now, it is thought------ it is said ----- -" " The world," interrupted the baron, " is as it was : the seasons revolve, but man grows not wiser." " Man lacks the knowledge of himself," remarked Mortimer. " It was so before the flood ; it will be so till the furthest stretch of time," "But
" But of De Burgh ?" questioned Hanslape, with a bitter sigh. " The earl of Kent," rejoined the knight, " lives in open hostility with the federate barons: already has the archbishop of Canterbury summoned council to compose their growing differ¬ ences ; nay, he was threatened excom¬ munication, to save the peace of the realm : armed with tbe thunders of the Vatican, fain would he have crushed the cockatrice in the egg-shell; but cabals and juntos have been formed, wars threat¬ ened, and civil evils waged. The earl of Kent may have been too zealous in the cause he fathered ; man seldom keeps a right medium : diverging from the track of moderation, he yields the rein to passion and to prejudice." " 'Tis pity—'tis woful !" sighed Hans¬ lape. " Living almost in hermit seclu¬ sion ; content at first with my happi¬ ness ; o'erwhelmed at last by affliction ; I know but little of human currency." G 2 " Be-
" Beshrew me ! 'tis a tangled maze/ said Mortimer, with a shrug and a smile ; *' beset with many a snare, and garnished with cobwebs to catch flies." " Methinks you are turned philoso¬ pher," said the baron. " Marry, no, not a jot of philosophy in my·* whole compound í I have eyes, and I use them—I have a tongue, and I keep it to myself." ** Then indeed are you a philosopher. Self, remember, is harder to govern than a multitude." ** You mistake me, my dear lord. I note, and I laugh at the follies of others : peradventure, they pay me off in like coin : the hobbyhorse of yester-day, is not, forsooth, the hobbyhorse of to-day : every age has its toy ; every human be¬ ing his weakness." " I would question of De Burgh ; 'tis years since we met," said the baron; " and years produce strange changes." " The earl of Kent," replied the knight,
knight, " has long been the prime mi¬ nister and chief favourite of my liege the king : nay, and I believe he merits all of reward and recompense ; but a monarch's smile is often tenuous, and the brightest sunbeam may be skirted by a shower." " What mean you ?" " I mean, that the warm temperature of the blood, gathers in royal, as in ple¬ beian veins: rumour bandies the actions of princes ; and the deed of a moment may be registered for ages." Ci It is well," remarked Hanslape, " where the page of a monarch's life, bears no blot, save the blot of human error : perfection is not of earth : crime is of demoniac origin. But proceed : though divorced from the world, I would fain hear the swollen scroll of rumour." t< The king is hasty in his loves and in his resentments," rejoined " "..? timer ; ** he is young, and zeal, proverbially, is the error of youth: doubtless he had been evil counselled : but when assem- G 3 bling
bling his forces at Portsmouth, because there lacked vessels to transport them to France, he drew his sword on the earl of Kent, accused him of subterfuge, and yielding to unlicensed rage, in th^ pre¬ sence of the whole court, branded him with the name of traitor." " On the earl of Kent," ejaculated Hanslape—" Virgin Mother ! and in the ken of all his enemies." " And yet the earl of Kent," pursued sir Roger, " marshalling his passions* like an able general, bore tbe brunt with an aspect unvarying, 'Tis well to be a courtier ! God wot, I should have raised my arm to a mitred bishop !" " Then," remarked the baron, " had you provoked your fate, and furnished handle to your own slander : but your pardon: doubtless, the royal Henry, cooling on the instant, rued the injustice of his ire." " Not so ; the royal Henry had assu¬ redly slain his faithful minister, had not my
my lord of Chester stayed the death- stroke." " Of Chester—mean you of Chester ?" asked Hanslape. " Yes, I mean the same Ranulph de Blondville, earl of Chester, who has sworn hatred unto the death; but who, with human inconsistency, though he would beard an enemy in the field, scometh the vantage of revenge." " I judged him right noble," said tbe baron ; " and his actions bespeaketh the true spirit of nobility : but I pray you, further of this misjudging feud?" " Oh Ρ laughing, " like a monstrous abortion, it was smothered in the birth. The king's wrath, is ever hot and brieft fitful and wild, and vanishing amid smiles and sunshine. The storm passed quick¬ ly ; and when, at tbe ensuing Easter, the flower of our forces landed at St. Maloes, naught was to be achieved, save through the counsel and approval of the justici¬ ary." ? 4 " Then
" Then the king sees and estimates the true virtues of De Burgh," said Hanslape; "he prizes the rare being, who know^eth his own strength, yet sheweth no inclination to oppress and to injure." Sk The king did value him," rejoined Mortimer: ** but now, he has given ear to Peter bishop of Winchester, and God and our Lady grant, his grace lighten not on steril ground ! Men say, the earl of Kent h dispossessed of his high office ; and that banished from courtly favour, he is now the butt, at which malice may shoot her random arrows. Tis a fickle world, and Fortune, at best, an arrant jade; poising us aloft upon her wheel; anon, plunging headlong into the mire. But I narrate tbe mere currency of re¬ port ; or rather, I speak through the vain gauge of other men's observation, for I myself was in Ireland, fighting under the brave W alter de Lacy." "And Chester?" asked Hanslape, awakening
awakening from the trance of deep thought ** Chester swells not the black list of th^ eari of Kent's accusers," quickly re¬ joined the knight ; " for Chester is still in France, tracking the road to pre¬ eminence, through blood and carnage: but enough of temporal, now, of spiritual callings"—And sir Roger closely ques¬ tioned of tbe pending pilgrimage, and listened, with sympathizing interest, to the deep sorrows and self-reproaches of the baron : bis look betokened incredu¬ lity, when he heard of the supposed spectre in the church of the Knights- Templars; and wben Hanslape, in all the lowliness of contrition, in allthe bit¬ terness of abject misery, pronounced— " 'Tis I who have provoked the deadly scourge—'tis I, who have pulled down tbe mighty ruin—'tis I, who have wi¬ thered, blighted all of earthly hope," he energetically grasped his arm, andin a tone of mingled pity and reprehen¬ sion* exclaimed, ? 5 " Look
" Look at the healthful William- look at the innocent Isabel, and call not yourself a bankrupt in earthly hone.* — ? '' " Happiness," faltered Hanslape, will¬ ing to justify himself in the eyes of friendship, " has set in the grave of Alice : however, by vigil, and by fiist, repentance may macerate the body, the mind knows its own burden, feels its own burden, lays down its own burden —but in the dust." '* Yet must not the burden of sorrow be transformed into the burden of re¬ morse," eagerly rejoined Mortimer. " You have delayed a self-prescribed duty—I have delayed a self-prescribed duty: and though whole years have passed away; though——" " You have not dallied in the flower- painted garden of bliss," interrupted the baron : " you have not straitened your service to the Creator, through blind and wilful homage to tbecveatme-^Vms to heaven*
heaven, savour not of the vows qf this world! Alas! alas! I was forewarned, and yet I fell." " I would I could behold this Tem¬ plar!" thoughtfully observed sir Roger: " by the blood of the martyrs, I would encounter thrice the dangers of a six months' pilgrimage, to trap him in his coil of flesh ! Assure yourself, my lord, he is a sin-born worm of earth, like unto ourselves. Did he not say he was one of this world ?—did he iot bid you seek him in the church of tf e Knights-Tem¬ plars ?—did he not-—" " Well, full well do I remember," in¬ terrupted Hanslape, and his shudder was almost audible : " he bid me, when writhing beneath the pressure of evil» seek him in the church of the Knights- Templars : and further, he added, that then again would he repeat, Vows to heaven, savour not qf the vows qf tkist xmrld l " Then why not hunt this bird rf ill g 6 omen
omen to his own perch ?" asked Morti¬ mer—" why not delve the mystery, even to its very base ? I will bear you fel¬ lowship, and I will keep vigil, even on the grave of the late good and noble Pembroke." " Alas ! and what boon of grace can light on our hardihood ?" demanded the baron— € ' what sign of favour betoken our zeal ? the spirit—if spirit it be—in my ear, again may knoll the death-knelL" " And if mortal it be," quickly pur¬ sued sir Roger, " the main load of the burden will be doffed, and we shall jour¬ ney towards Walsingham, with freer and with lighter hearts." " The main load will abide with me unto death," murmured Hanslape. " Saints of paradise ! how little can the happy guess the griefs of the wretched í but I pray you, direct, as seemeth best fitting, I would adventure ought, for the preservation of my William, and my darling Isabel." Brief
Brief was the period betwixt arrange¬ ment and departure : the sword and the battle-axe* were exchanged for the staff and the scrip ; the stately gait, the glance of bold defiance, for the lowly bend of deep and contrite meekness : prayer, and endurance, and self-mortification, savour¬ ed of holiness and zeal ; and the blessing of the church, the sole hope of sanctifica¬ tion, was wooed as the pass to heaven. The blue mists of morning still capped the hills, still combated the growing ad¬ vance of glory, when the portals of Hans¬ lape closed upon the long train of fol¬ lowers, distributing doles, bearing pre¬ cious gifts, and shadowing the steps of the noble palmers. The face of England, at tbe period of which we write, contrasted its present rich and teeming aspect : thickly wood¬ ed, and interspersed with heath, and bog, and wilderness, it bore not tbe smiling signs of cultivation : the labourer reaped not his toils in the bland garner of do¬ mestic
mestic peace ; acting but at the nod of an imperious master, the iron bond of vassalage, curbing all the better feelings of nature, left him but the automaton of another's rule : power, with impunity, oppressed the myriad: the laws were unexecuted, or rather, each noble mo¬ delled the jurisprudence of his own do¬ main: aping the demigod, grasping the sceptre, waging war, and hurling defi¬ ance, every castle was the fastness of strength ; every baron, the petty sove¬ reign of his own people. If the king, at will, could imprison, banish, and attaint ; the baron, aping the kingly state, and kingly power, maintained about his per¬ son, the parade and show of royalty ; his justiciary, constable, cjamberlain, sene¬ schal, mareschal, chancellor—could en¬ gage in hereditary or personal feud ; and confederating with neighl "urs, as potent as himself, could daunt by violence, and oppress by military prowess. It was a season, when fierce and lawless bands aided
aided in the convulsions of the state ; when marauders lurked in the caves and defiles, waylaying, ravaging, lording with fire and with sword : a season, to make even bravery quail, unless hemmed in by force and power: a season, replete with extortion ; blackened with acts of wanton turpitude; shrouded in dark¬ ness and in horror ; registered in deeds of blood and hardihood, by each and every contemporary chronicler. It is not for us to track the slow ad¬ vance of the pilgrims, to minute com¬ bining obstacles of nature and of local ill, staying their speed, and intercepting their progress ; neither will we drag the reader, to the different houses of religious call ; the priories, chantries, preceptories, commanderies, and hospitals, in which they nightly found favour : enough be it, to tarry, for a brief space, in London, at the holy house of the brethren of the Temple, where man and beast alike so¬ journed, for the baron of Hanslape to crave
crave counsel of the prior, and to keep vigil in the church, at the shrine of the earl-marshal. But though for a whole night, he lay bareheaded on the cold pavement ; though he prostrated himself in the dust—though he martyred his flesh by shrift and penance—he encoun¬ tered not the mysterious Templar, who on the fast of St. Dunstan, had before to fatally darkened liis path. He groaned in the self-abasement of the spirit ; for his conscience, and his humility', told him, he was not meet to hold commune with one so blessed : he had despised the warning so mercifully vouchsafed: he had suffered the lures of sense to su¬ percede the calls of devotion—and the neglect must be expiated, by long en¬ durance and by tears. Alas! he had called down upon his own head, the weighty dole of health-consuming re¬ morse ; he had, or rather, he fancied that he had, pointed the barbed arrow, which had destroyed the vital strength of Alice and
and her boy,—" It is neglect, which has let loose the fiend," he would exclaim ; " it is blind and wilful rebellion, which has poisoned the bright summer of my hopes." The prior listened to the tale of accusa¬ tion and of woe ; his hand placed upon the arm of Hanslape, his eyes intently fixed upon bis varying features.—" If omis¬ sions be summed up as well as trespas¬ ses, you have sinned, my son," he pro¬ nounced : " but grace is vouchsafed through penance, and crimson may be bleached as snow." " And the Templar, father," asked the baron, with an eagerness almost de¬ priving him of breath. The prior, for a brief space, seemed lost in profound thought—-suddenly start¬ ing—" Vows to heaven, savour not of the voxvs qf this world! Said he not so, my son ?" " He did, holy father ; he said it in the
the nave of the church ; he repeated it ere I lost him in the door-way." " And he bid you seek him here—at the grave of the noble Pembroke—in the church of our most holy order ?" " Alas ! yes : he bid me, when writh¬ ing beneath the pressure of evil, seek him in the church of the Knights-Templars : and he told me, if in life, he would again repeat— Vows to heaven, savour not ofthe vows of this world /" " Said he> if in life, my son ?" ques¬ tioned the preceptor. " Aye, as surely did he, as I have life and breath to name it." " Then must he be of mortal mould," quickly resumed the soldier of the Tem¬ ple, " for a lie beseemeth not the mouth of a sin-purged spirit; then must he be in life, my son, and his vocation truly godly." "If I could only think so," said Hans- slape, doubtfully ; " if I could only dis¬ possess my mind, of a visitation so awful," *' What then, my son ?" 64 Why
** Why then," pursued the baron, " I could fulfil my pilgrimage with a lighter heart." " Grasp the staff; brace on the san¬ dals, and depart in peace," solemnly pro¬ nounced the preceptor. " If a vision, it was the vision of holiness: zeal, and faith, and devout observances, will quick expiate the lapse of mortal infirmity : fulfil the spiritual calling, my son, and return, with the rich guerdon of peace and of content." Hanslape sighed ; he stood, with his hand pressed upon his forehead, his rea- .son wrestling with the heavy bonds of superstition. " And if of flesh," he asked, " father, why tarried he last night, when on the self-same spot, girded in sackcloth, and grovelling in dust, I watched and wooed his coming?" " All that is of flesh is perishable," re¬ sumed the prior, after the pause of a mo¬ ment : " man, is as the flower of the field;
field ; his sojourn, as brief; his beauty f as fading; his strength, as evanescent The earth has been heaped upon many a brother, and knight-companion of our order, since that fast of St. Dunstan, in which thou didst keep vigil on the grave of the right noble William earl of Pem¬ broke : many of our brethren too have passed from hence to Palestine ; and be¬ girt with the breastplate of faith and ho¬ liness, are now fighting the good fight, working out their owm sanctification, in the lifeblood of heresy ; many, rallying to the stand of the patriarch of Jerusa¬ lem, are defending the relics of Christen¬ dom, are disputing, inch by inch, the birth-place of the blessed Jehovah," " Then must I depart," sighed Hans¬ lape, " with the like shroud of mystery, enveloping the being and the motives of the Templar." " Not so, my son : thou mayest de¬ part in security, in trust, and in peace : if in death, the freed spirit of our holy brother
brother will pray for all who toil and labour in darkness; if in life, the hour of solution may yet dawn," "Alas!" mused the baron, long after he bad passed from the presence of the preceptor, " human effort is as nought in tbe scale of immensity ; man, but as the thistle-beard, broken and scattered bv the tempest. What has been my journey, what my vigil in tbe Temple-church ? like the moonbeams on a dreary waste, disclosing to the way-worn traveller, the loneliness of bis prospect. This grief, this remorse, this preying sorrow, must rankle tili time shall expunge me from the list of beings ; this load of care, this sharpened thorn of memory, must fester until death." He bent his knee; he raised his bands, bis eyes, his whole soul to heaven. " Accept, graciously accept," he murmured, "the atonement of my broken spirit I have dared the tax—I would pay the forfeit. Virgin Mother, spare my babes ; visit not on the remnant
remnant of my family, the just penalty of my own transgression !" He wept— he fasted—he passed the livelong night in prayer—he invoked the spirit of Alice, the spirit of the infant Henry : he knelt, with his head pillowed upon the cold shrine of the earl-marshal, yet no Tem¬ plar came to scare or to admonish. It was a melancholy vigil, and it waned in si¬ lence and in woe. The dappled grey of morning trembled in the east: Hans¬ lape watched the growing swell : he traced " the beam of the ascending sun ; dispersing the storms of the hill, bring¬ ing ????? to the glittering fields ;" yet he shared not in that pure joy, with which creation ever hails the birth of day; his heart was full, his spirit strick¬ ened, his mind, lacerated and weakened, sapped by fanaticism, jaundiced by bi¬ gotry. He partook of the morning meal ; he craved the blessing of the preceptor ; he bestowed rich gifts, to secure to him¬ self the prayers of the knights-compa¬ nions,
nions, to purchase masses for the souls of Alice and the little Henry ; yet with a feeling of preying despondence, of bitter self-reproach—with a sensation, more of dread than of hope, be moved by the side of sir Roger Mortimer, and heading, once more, his assembled followers, quit¬ ted London, and pursued the road to Walsingham.
CHAP-
CHAPTER VIT.
««.__..^. --------- a Yes, I will succour thee! I'll bear thee far above tiie blast-- of fate; Above nvmV sroffs, and fiovvn-, nnd fickle humours: And heav'n deal with ??, ?? Γ deal out favour !" A lisping accent, gentle and tender as the cooing of a young dove, dissipated the slumbers of the baron of Hanslape · he thought of his own children, and half raising himself upon his elbow, beheld the dawn breaking upon a boy, beautiful as fabled Love! the lips, like roses steeped in dew, parted in a smile ; the eyes, play¬ ful and brilliant, rivetted upon him ; the chubby hands, glowing and dimpled, tangled in the coarse folds of his vest. The kindly glance of encouragement, as the sun's rays, warming and rallying the drooping blossoms, lured the child still closer
closer to his side: he breathed an en¬ dearing epithet, and quick were the tender arms, like clinging ivy, clasped around his neck ; he eould not crush the hopes of confidence; he could not put back the infant pleader, yet he longed to examine every existing clue, to de¬ cipher, if possible, some solution to the mystery ; and he tarried with reluctance, until drowsiness again stretched in in¬ action, the pigmy hero of the copse- wood. The sun, rising more brilliant from the blackness of tbe last nights tempest, in many a trembling lengthened line of radiance, piercing through the long- arched dormitory, shone upon the closed eyelids of sir Roger Mortimer : the pages and the grooms too were fast locked in the oblivion of sublunary care; every thing around partook of the stilly calm of death's twin-sister, when the baron, with careful caution, arose and minutely examined each remnant of the child's vol. i. ? apparel.
apparel. The garments were composed ofthe rich texture of luxury : the finest linen inwrapped his tender limbs ; and the outer covering, of rare and costly silk, was wrought with ingenious work¬ manship : in the hood of the mantle, secured with evident care, was the leaf of an ivory tablet, Hanslape snatched it, and he read : " The wrath of man, is not like the thunder, which rages, and dies, and yields to returning sunshine ! Man, restless a.s the savage of the desert, deals out re¬ prisal, measures out vengeance—not by his own demerits, but by his own power. Stranger, if you have a heart—if the image of God be not defaced and poi¬ soned by the rank tares of the world— if the milk of Christian charity be not turned to gall, succour, in the little Hu¬ bert, the scion of a noble house." *' Strange," mused Hanslape, reading and re-reading the scrawl. " The scion of a noble house, yet cast upon the hu¬ manity
rnanity of a stranger. Saints of heaven ! perhaps a fate, disastrous ás my own, has severed thee from the parent tree^—has sent thee adriit, amid the breakers of the world, without anchorage, and without reliance. Miserable mother! miserable lather! of a child so doomed!" And as he stooped to kiss the blooming cheek of the little slumberer, the tear of ge¬ nuine pity, distilling from his heart, fell upon its white forehead. " I will be thy friend—I will be thy guardian—I will be thy father," he softly whispered, still bending over the couch—" I will hear thee with me to Haaslape, and plaee thee with my own William and Isabel." The early call for devotion, in the shrill tinkling of the matin bell, dissi¬ pated the heavy slumbers of sir Roger; he started upon his elbow, and he smiled ut tlie occupation of the baron.—" A doughty nurse, forsooth l> he exclaimed. ** God wot, my lord, your office is seem- H 2 ly!
ly ! I wage, the urchin thrives beneath your fosterage." " And if we rear him," tenderly pro¬ nounced the baron, " may he reward our care !" " Aye, sevenfold may he pour the blessing into your bosom !" resumed the knight ; " for to light in a rich vineyard, is better than a stubble field. Marry, 'twas a blessed storm which blew bim into the copse-wood ! But bark, the last bell summonses to the chapel! What, hoy, ye sluggish loons !" springing from his own hard couch, and arousing tbe still sleeping domestics—■" up to primes, and patch the broken bour to tbe next nights portion : up, up, varlets ; doff sleep, and hie to prayers. Tbe sun mounts the heavens, and the last bell lias chimed." Devotion marked the assembled throng crowding the chapel; every heart seemed tranced in the fervour of holiness, every tongue attuned to the psalmody of praise :
praise : the little Hubert, clinging to the side of his generous benefactor, clasped his hands in infant mimicry ; his eyes rivetted upon the placid features of the baron; his lisping murmurs mingling in the swell of occasional response : he seemed, as one, reared in piety; as one, accustomed to the solemn observances of worship; for the sonorous chanting of the servitors, and the loud swell of the organ, excited interest rather than terror. " Methinks," observed the comman¬ der, listening attentively to the recital of the baron, " this poor nursling needeth one of nature's own fosterdams. It is not the belm or the cassock can minister to his helplessness." " Woman," said Mortimer, his bronzed cheek flushing a deeper colouring, " be¬ fits the kindly office: endearment and gentleness shine best in their native province." si Tarry then, my son," urged the ? 3 com-
commander, " until a dame be sought for : anon, a brother servitor shall wend to the nigh hamlet, and the guerdon will ensure success." ** I would but deposit him for a brief season," replied the baron : " when I ren¬ turn from the chapel of St. Mary, I will bear him with me to Hanslape." " Why not consign him to the ghostly fathers of the church?" asked sir Roger —" why not rear him a peace-offering to heaven ?" i( Aye, in the nigh hamlet," said the commander, " until of age to become a chaplain erf our order. His path will be lowliness ; his beacon paradise : divorced from fleshly lust, wedded to the true cause, he may track the steps of the good and the brave ; he may toil up the steep ; he may gain the summit of preeminence. Warring with apostasy, baptizing his hopes in infidel blood, some heroic ex¬ ploit, some mighty achievement, may enroll him a true knight : he may be¬ come
come a commander, and rise to the favour of the grand master of the hospital of St. John, and guardian of the poor of our Saviour Jesus Christ; he may en* noble himself by his own deeds ; he may live the champion of the Sepulchre—he may die, blessed, thrice blessed, in holi¬ ness and zeal !" " Yield him—yield him, I pray you, to the knights of St. John of Jerusalem," urged Mortimer, reading, what he de¬ ciphered, irresolution in the thoughtful brow of his friend. ** What"—and Hanslape started in dismay— " relinquish the charge so mys¬ teriously given?—cast off the being, yielded, and accepted, at the foot of the cross V " We will mould him unto holiness,' 5 pursued the commander; " we will fa¬ shion him unto the humility and self- endurance of our brethren; we will divorce him from ought of the world's H 4 snares ;
snares; we will fit hira for hereafter glory." '* It may be so," said the baron : " but how know we, his heart war not with the calling—how guess we, the native bias of his mind ?" " Rebellion is ?? the sin of witchcraft? pronounced the hospitaller; " and the curb, and the check-rein, befitteth the unbroken steed." Hanslape shuddered.—" If the deci¬ sion of matured reason, 3 * he rejoined; " if the choice of due deliberation; then will I yidd the willing candidate; then will I furnish all suited to the high calling : but till then-—your pardon, father—he must abide in my own keeping; he must share the nursery-sports with my own children." " And may the wanton inconsistencies of youth,—may the mad caprices of in¬ experience, ne'er pour out evil upon your teeming measure of good!" ex¬ claimed the commander; " may you reap
reap a harvest, as substantial, as the un¬ substantial shadows of this world can yield! I have traversed the globe—I have warred with the Saracens—I have fought in the battles of our glorious Richard—I have seen his arm of power, scatter the foe, like thistle-beard before the wind—I have toiled through a long, long life ; and I have gleaned the know¬ ledge, that all below is ' vanity and vexation of spirit," " True, father," sighed the baron : " but your experience, cools not the fever of youth, steadies not the dizzy brain, clips not the buoyant wing of fancy, nor dims the ardour of anticipation." " Heaven is all-sufficient !" murmured the soldier of the cross, and folding his arms, he bowed his head, in token of humility. The hour of departure arrived : every mist, and every vapour, scudded before the sunbeams: the pilgrims mounted their steeds, and the cavalcade awaited η 5 but
but the order to march, when the screams, and the frantic struggles of the little Hubert—now to be committed to tbe keeping of a dame, sought out and summoned from the adjoining hamlet— melted the heart of his new guardian. Neither threat, or bribe, or entreaty, could silence the cries of the boy: his hands were entangled in the cloak of the baron ; his beseeching looks, his eyes dimmed witb tears, rivetted upon !;im. In vain sir Roger Mortimer rallied his native pleasantry; in vain the knight- commander himself relaxed the rigidity of his calling ; the convulsive efforts of the child redoubled, and safety, and al¬ most life, was threatened. " Let be—let be," implored Hanslape, shaming at his own indecision : " the sin-offering be doubly acceptable from hands so pure. He shall abide with us ; he shall journey with us to Walsingham." u Gramercy Τ muttered the dame, but a mark from the baron changed the murmura
murmurs into a blessing. Mortimer, shrugging his shoulders, mounted his palfrey—Hanslape, blushing, placed his burden quietly before him. The gilded offerings and precious be¬ quests of piety, found ready acceptance from the canons regular of St Mary : but though barefooted and bareheaded the gifts were deposited on the step of the altar; though the smoke of incense spired towards heaven; though midnight masses were performed, for the repose of Alice and the little Henry ; though so¬ lemn requiems rang through the fretted aisles ; though the ear of the prior was open to the shrift of the noble palmer— his bosom lost not its mound of care, his spirit rallied not beneath the awarded chastening. The midnight hour found him, alike sleepless, alike desponding, alike the slave of listlessness and woe : it was deep grief, it was mourning sor¬ rowing consciousness, it was that de¬ spoliation, known but to the heart, which, η 6 like
Hke hb, bas loved—and ike bis, hee» widowed; that uni ver»! ????, shroud¬ ing the filtare, stripping «way the taifa rf promise, wrø&Mfig round tame and Wfc, the gloomy cype^ små the funereal yar ! ?? voke rf Alice rom in every sigh—the ferm rf Alice Kved in every mental virion—her smile of love, her eye rf tenderness, shone through the haze rf Site .and death ; sow awakening deipair; now, thrilling on every chord of sensibility. The return rf vhe baron to the castle rf Hanslape, his separation from sir Roger Mortimer, and hi* immediate intercourse with dear and cherished ob¬ jects, for a season, probed every wound, and renewed every grief: but time, earth's sovereign balsam, gradually sof tened the throes of bleeding tenderness ; he eould talk of the treasure, insatiate death İmâ claimed; he could visit the spot rf her rest; he eould recall her f&ns and her projects ; he could recount her
her labours for the welfare of her off¬ spring; he could dwell on her hoard of love, and study how best to realize txil her wishes. No more, did criminal de¬ spair, did irreligious distraction, war against his fortitude : he looked, he talk¬ ed» he felt that the pleasures of life were passed away ; yet amid the heaviest hours of indulgence, never did he renounce the warm and anxious desire to fulfil his duties: diligently did he struggle against tbat sickly loathing of amuse¬ ment and occupation, which invariably belongs to great and sincere grief; and for the love of his children, he forced himself to take a decided interest in all whicli concerned them. The little Hu¬ bert too partook of his care and of his affection: he was docile; he was endear¬ ing; and often would the seedlings of eharacter, budding, bursting into being, extort the smile, and dissipate " mo¬ ments of despondence, when the mur¬ murs of tbe heart menaced destruction ;" often
often would the embryo spirit of grow¬ ing decision, awaken mild exordium, and call forth the language of reproof. William de Maudit, the heir to wealth and to honour, was warm, impe¬ tuous, adventurous ; yielding to the pre¬ sent bias; zealous in every undertaking; his health-dappled cheek flushing a deeper colouring, his dark eyes flashing living fire, when listening to the tale of persecution, or bodying the dreams of heroic story. Isabel was light as fairy- sylph; beauteous as " the white-armed daughter of Caral;" tender, as infant spring, ushered on the gales of the south ! And Hubert, the poor found¬ ling of the copse-wood, so mysteriously resigned, so mercifully adopted :~he too, was a child of the gentlest noblest promise; his person, delicately moulded; his features, soft, speaking, and intelli¬ gent; his eyes, animated and brilliant; his hair, wavy and silken ; his heart, flexible as young Love, needing but the tide
tide of time and circumstances, to un¬ fold its worth, to rally into action, its magnanimity, and its powe«rs.—" I will be a soldier," he would exclaim, sport¬ ing around the knees of the aged Geof- fry ; " and I will wear a sword, like the baron ; and a shield on my arm, and a casque on my head," " And I too," said William, pluming his arrows, 4 and stringing his crossbow, si will fight in the wars, and go forth, a champion, and a deliverer." " And I," lisped out little Isabel, rais¬ ing her fair face, and smiling through her glossy ringlets, ζ ' will live with my dear brothers, and do just like Hu¬ bert." '* Happy children ! blissful season of hope and promise !" would muse the baron, stifling down the heavy sigh, and marking their innocent loves, their light pastimes, their sanguine anticipa¬ tions. " Life, in its earliest spring, strewed with sweets teeming with rain¬ bow-
bow-flowers, ardent, confiding, uncon¬ scious of the ràde blight, riding on the wings of time! Ah ! may the sunshine last! may the illusion continue! may no sudden storm, rending away the buds, strip them of tbeir loveliness ! may ......*-" The reverie was broken, by the shrieks and sobs of Isabel, who, with eyes red and swollen, with colour heightened, and hair dishevelled, rushed into the chamber.—" What ails my dar¬ ling?" asked Hanslape, alarmed and anxious. " William has clambered up—Wil¬ liam has pulled down the armour in the great hall—William has—has—lias killed Hubert." " God of infinite mercy, forefend !" ejaculated the baron ; and though death- sick at the bare possibility, with one bound he reached the hall. The little sufferer lay in the arms of the agitated Geoffry, his eyes closed, and the blood trickling from his foie- head,
head, fearfully contrasting the ashy hue of his cheek—William was sobbing over him with passionate vehemence, kissing his hands, and beseeching forgiveness : the displaced armour lay scattered upon the marble floor. It was a scene, ago¬ nizing, riving every pang of memory ; for nought, save the shrieks and the image of the frantic Alice, were want¬ ing, to recall the mangled Henry* The baron staggered back; he clung to the stone pillar ; he groaned in tlie bitter» ness of his feelings. " Fear not, my lord," faltered Geof¬ fry. " The dear child will live : he is stunned, not slain." " Not slain—not dead"—and Hans¬ lape burst into a passion of tears. The piercing cries of Isabel redou¬ bled.—" He will not speak to me—he does not know me," she sobbed out. " Would it had lighted on my head!" exclaimed the tortured Wil¬ liam;
liam ; ** would it had killed me out¬ right !" " I shall never, never be happy, if Hubert goes to heaven," shrieked Isa¬ bel. - Do not let him, dear father ; do keep him with us: if Hubert goes to heaven, Isabel must go to heaven too." " Hush ! hmh !" implored Geoffry, for a slight convulsion passing over the features of Hubert, betrayed him, not insensible to their affliction. Long was it ere composure could be restored, ere, weeping and struggling, De Maudit and Isabel were torn from the side of their young companion. A uni¬ versal gloom, a deep, an appalling horror, spread throughout the castle : all hailed the visitation of divine vengeance ; for such was the mischance, that the un¬ toward accident befel on the 19th of May—on the fast ol St Dunstan—a fast, which before had sc^ttjred mildew, on the hopes of the house of Hanslape. The baron felt it, mourned it in his inward
inward soul ; he recalled the emphatic words of the Knight-Templar— Votes to heaven, savour not ofthe vows of this world —and superstition traced it as a fresh indication, that the wrath, his ne¬ glect had deprecated, was yet unar> peased. Stricken in bleeding consciousness ; humbled, bowed down to the dust ; la¬ menting the past, dreading the future; shrinking within his oratory ; number¬ ing his beads, and murmuring aves, paters, and credos, he awaited the re» port of father Gilbert, a holy brother, of the cell of Ciuniac monks, from Tick- ford, near Newport-Pagnel, who served in the treble capacity, of spiritual con¬ fessor, leech to the household, and tutor to the children: a man, gifted in re¬ ligion's lore ; lettered, according # to the computation of the times; fashioned to the weighty cognizance, by purity of conduct, practical knowledge of phar¬ macy, and long devotion to study. u Be
" Be at peace, røy lord," he pronounc¬ ed, entering, and again closing the door of the oratory. Hanslape raised his head from the step of the altar.—** Flatter me not, fa¬ ther," he articulated. " This day, this fast of St. Dunstan, is freighted with fate: nevertheless," and he erossed his bosom, in meekness and in pious trust, ** 'tis fit for me that I should be af¬ flicted." '* God is all-merciful ?* pursued the confessor. ** Take comfort, my son : God crusheth not the bending reed—· God bruiseth not the head of the mourn¬ ing William, with an evil so weighty," *' The boy Hubert*—the dear child of mystery and misfortune?" asked the ba¬ ron. " Is now calmly sleeping," replied the monk ; * f his wound bound up ; liis bo¬ dily ills forgotten. It is poor De Mau¬ dit, who claims our pity, for he now la¬ bours under the grievous ill of self-re¬ proach." ' f I hope
* t I hope so*—I pray so," said the ba¬ ron, fervently. " If peace and blessings be the guerdon of right, regret and sor¬ row should ever crowd upon the heels of wrong." " It was but the effervescence of youth," rejoined father Gilbert; "the mere sport of playfulness." ** He might have killed his friend," said Hanslape, shuddering. " He should remember, that the senior in years, simuld ever be the senior in conduct." ,s We do not alway as we ought," ob¬ served the monk, willing to extenuate his heart-struck pupil. " By nature, frail and imperfect, man slumbers o'er his duty ; and childhood, my good lord, is not the season for thought," 46 True, father ; but 'tis the season for pruning : the sapling may bend ; the tree resists our efforts." ih Would you have me seriously re¬ prove?" asked the confessor; "would you
you have me adjudge penance for a mere casualty ?" " Casualty," echoed the baron — " Alas ! alas! forget you, 'tis the fast of St. Dunstan ?—'tis the fate-fraught duy, gathering in clouds o'er the bouse of Hanslape? Henceforth, I would know it set apart for devotion ; sacred to holi¬ ness ; dedicated to prayer, to fasting, and to privation," " And your son, my lord : must we dismiss him to bis bed, unblessed and unassured ?" Hanslape mused for a moment, all the parent gathering in his eyes.—" Be it even as you will," he at length pro¬ nounced. " But, dear father, I pray you, season the blessing, with whole* some reproof, and pious admonition. Bid De Maudit, look upon the lacerated bead of poor Hubert ; and henceforth, bid him, curb the wild flights of unbri- bled will." " Must we dismiss him, without the kiss
kiss of peace?" asked the monk, paus¬ ing at the door of the oratory. * t Tlie little Isabel too; already has she shed tears enow to drown our patient Hu- bert : must her young head, for the first time, be pillowed on thorns ?" * 4 The saints forefend !" and Hanslape sprung from the seat on which he had east himself. " I had intended," he fal¬ tered, " to have sacrificed inclination, to bave martyred nature, by the voluntary renunciation of her dearest right ;—this night—this fast of St. Dunstan, to have denied myself the consolation, whicli alone tents the wounds of memory :— but why, why extend punishment to my unconscious children ? Lead on, father : indecision has been the bane of my life"—and he trembled as he spoke —« lead on, I will bestow the nightly ben ison —I will snatch one kiss—and then, the chapel, the cold grave of my Alice, be my rest till morning." Father Gilbert would have remon¬ strated,
strated, but he knew full well the bent of inclination ; he knew, that voluntary penance, is ever the most rigid ; that a smrit strickened. like unto the baron's, tolerateth nought of palliative or favour. He led from the oratory, and together, they passed to the couch, on which re¬ clined the still-slumbering Hubert. De Maudit, in breathless watchfulness, stood listening to his calm breathing : Isabel was on her knees, still deluged in tears —like the lily, bending beneath the night-dews—her face, half hid in her bosom ; her hands clasped ; and her lips, murmuring appeals for mercy r and for favour. The baron paused, in w r rapt and painful interest. " Such ever be tbe tax of negligence," he softly whis¬ pered ; e * such the heavy reckoning en¬ tailed on human folly !" William sprung to the feet of his father ; he snatched his hand; he spoke not, for tears, swollen and blinding, streamed from his eyes. ** If shed for your own rashness," pur¬ sued
sued Hanslape, te they are gracious tears, my son; tears, which must, and will avail." " For the sufferings of Hubert," sobbed William ; ** for my dear, dear friend, and brother ; for—for—for my¬ self, dearest father; for my heart must break, if Hubert dies." The hollow moan of the wounded boy, spoke him alive to the lamenta¬ tions of his loved companion ; he strug¬ gled, and he forced a smile, as feebly he uttered^— et To-morrow, dear William, we will shoot our arrows from the ram¬ part ; to-morrow we——-" Father Gilbert enjoined silence, and he led De Maudit and Isabel from the chamber. But the morrow, and many succeeding morrows, found Hubert still fevered and ailing, and William still tortured with anxiety and self-reproach. Isabel too, had lost all her spirits ; and the baron, and the holy Gilbert, watched the symptoms of the little patient with vol. ι. ι unweary-
unwearying tenderness. A contusion on the head, and a fearful cut above the left eye, called forth all the skill of the as-ed herbalist : salves and medicaments ? were resorted to; and lenitives and emollients, to assuage pain, and lure back health. Hubert gradually strength¬ ened into convalescence; but Hubert bore on his forehead a scar, destined to descend with him to the grave : bis gen¬ tleness, his mild endurance, bis uncom¬ plaining patience, had endeared him to every member of the household ; so for¬ giving, and so submissive ; so heroic, and so considerate; yielding unshrink¬ ing to the probe, and sparing ever the feelings of De Maudit. " He is a noble boy !" said the baron ; " and his peace, and his prosperity, shall be dear, as the peace and prosperity of my own William." " He is a marvellous boy !" remarked father Gilbert ; " for his heart comprises much of the virtues, and little of the dross
dross of humanity : his disposition shows itself in light and trifling casualties. I have marked his buddings of excellence, almost in the cradle." " I would," rejoined Hanslape, " we could unravel the mystery of his birth —we could expound the fearful tale which drove him to the shelter of the copse-wood! I never recall that fate- fraught period, but I shame in not grap¬ pling the man who consigned him to my keeping." is It was a casualty, to defy presence of mind," observed the confes.sor ; tr to put to flight all of self-command : the hour, the storm, the attendant circum¬ stances." The baron shuddered, and crossed his bosom. * t Doubtless, 'tis a tale of grief and woe/ pursued the monk : " nought, save danger the most apparent ; nought, save despair the most deadly, could goad a lathei to the re¬ nunciation." u A father, 51 repeated Hanslape, " Oh J 2 no,
no, it could not be a father ! I traced no irresolution, no father's tremulous misgiving tenderness, in the parting pang." " Then, may God bind the hearts of the bereaved parents !" solemnly pro¬ nounced the pious Gilbert; " may God pour the unction of his mercy upon their festering wounds ! If spirited a- way, if the adjudged torture of treache¬ rous malevolence, the dissolution of soul and body must be far less bitter." " We cannot resolve," said the baron ; " we can only wonder." " We cannot repair," resumed the confessor; " we can only lament." u Lament," echoed Hanslape, " in such a comfort to my own age, in such a brother to my children, in------" He paused ; his very temples crimsoned, for lie encountered the steady glance of re¬ proof. " Think of the father, think of the mother
mother of Hubert," said the confessor ; " think of the parents of such a son." The baron bowed his head in convic¬ tion»—" True," he murmured : " selfish and inconsiderate, in computing my own gain, I thought not of another's loss." " 'Tis the infirmity of nature," mildly observed the confessor ; ?ί 'tis the weak¬ ness of the flesh : the spirit must wage eternal warfare, or its victory be incom¬ plete." " The saints bear me witness," eagerly exclaimed the baron, " that my study and my aim be the welfare of our united charge. Could exertion, or ought of human sacrifice, ensure discovery ; could ought, appertaining to man, dissipate the dense fogs, obscuring the sun of his fortune—ah ! believe me, I would la¬ bour for his weal, as joyfully and as un¬ ceasing, as I would labour for tbe weal of William and Isabel." " His weal—their w r eal, be in a high¬ er keeping," piously pronounced father ι 3 Gilbert,
Gilbert. " Enough be it, to humble ourselves to him, who alone is mighty to save, t to the uttermost, them that come unto him r Enough be it, to cast ourselves on Omnipotence, diligently fashioning our minds, for ought and every vicissitude ! We are here, my son, for a brief season ; here, for the ex¬ ercise of our faith and our virtue : beset by temptations, casualties, myriads of ills ; waylaid on every side ; assailed where most vulnerable; shaken where most secure : here, in this vale of tears, amid precipices, and shoals, and quick¬ sands, without one surety, save religion ; for * wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption,' cometh from above !" * f If I could tell how best to lighten upon the parents of Hubert," said the baron, after a pause of deep thought, " however regret might arise, the track of duty should be firmly trodden. I would resign him to their claim, con¬ tent
tent to know, 'twas nature only could supersede my own." " Long, I fear me, may it be, ere tbe veil be lifted," observed the confessor; " for faction and malice spread with giant strides : blasted by the arm of power, driven from home, and from se¬ curity, how know we, but death may have sealed the tale of persecution ?" " Or dire captivity," said Hanslape, shuddering in unfeigned horror ! " 'Twas no common despair could drive to the copse-wood. England, holy father, has become the scene of blood and outrage ; her nobles warring with each other ; law but a name ; and honour, the mere cloak wherewith to cover rapacity." " Tis alas ! a season of disaster and peril," observed the confessor ; " might striving with right; power trampling on ought of justice: a season, to awaken hope, religious hope, within the soul ; for man, trusting in his fellow, buildeth his house but upon tbe sands. Time? i h and
and divine interposition, my son, may dissolve the fog, even to the brightness of noonday—Hubert may yet joy in the authors of his being—Hubert may yet unravel, with pride, the tan¬ gled woof of his own lineage : virtue be ever the true essence of nobility; and though vassalage be his born inheri¬ tance; though——" " Shame were it to think," interrupt¬ ed Hanslape, " Hubert were of ought save of noble descent: his form, his face, his manners, his contempt of dan¬ ger, the very sallies of his bold and buoyant spirit, proclaim superiority ; be. aides, father, lack we more proof, lives it not in the silken gear which encased his infant limbs ? God wot, the son of an anointed monarch, need not crave a more seemly covering ! and the tablet too ; savoureth it not, of a mind, boast¬ ing the richness of painstaking culture ?" " It savoureth of far more than the finite eye of man can encompass," re¬ marked
marked father Gilbert " Plunged in darkness, we are here, beset with evil, and muffled in the gyves of our own ignorance : we compute, we reckon, we resolve, and we define ; but alas ! at best, human reason is a wild chaos of inconsistency, often wrecked and lost in the maze of its own errors.'* " Yet may we hope a pilot midst the breakers," said the baron ; " may we seek a haven midst the storm !" " In God's good time," pronounced the monk ; " we may hope, and we may labour ; but unblessed, and unsanctified, our hopes, and our labours, prove but vain," " We will preserve the relics," though U fully resumed the baron; " we will gar¬ ner all, and every vestige, appertaining to the mystery of the copse-wood, as though rare and precious, as the costly gems of the east : and when Hubert be- fitteth the confidence ; when of an age, to weigh and to feel, tl,? doubts, and ι 5 the
the hopes, and the incertitudes of his fortune«—then; be it on some fast of St. Dunstan, when care and when gloom press heaviest on my mind, I will lay them before him, and with them, all of the dark page of his own story." " And may he be seasoned with pray¬ er," solemnly rejoined father Gilbert ; " may he be fashioned in grace and in submission ; may his mind be braced in every trial ! that when plunged into the full tide of tbe world ; when beset with the shoals, and quicksands, and breakers of passion, he may feel, that man's surest stay is integrity; his best raft amid a sea of storm, discretion; his only panacea to sublunary woe, holiness '"
CHAP-
CHAPTER VIII.
?+*■*++>*.+*■
*< --------- Firm m the raith of my fathers; Am tlie rock, brea-stmtç the wave» of ocean, t'nshnken, unyielding, will I stand." Whole years of prosperity may be com¬ puted in one single line : it is adversity, which thickens the page, and swells months into volumes. Heretofore, the swiftly-stealing current of time, had met nought to turn its ripple into waves: nought to dim its brightness : gliding in sunshine, freighted with vivid flowers, it had dazzled with splendour; it liad lured with uncloying sweets ! But the first pang was quick approaching; the early initiation, bespeaking life destined to endurance ! Isabel was to be removed to Nuneaton, to the convent of St Mary, to the guardianship of her paternal grand- i 6 mother,
mother : there, beneath the example and tutorage of the holy sisterhood, to glean instruction, to be perfected in the ad¬ judged accomplishments of her age and sex ; and De Maudit and Hubert, were to remain at the castle, were to prose¬ cute their studies, under the eye of fa¬ ther Gilbert The hour of parting was a trial of the heart ; it was felt, and it was mourned, long after they had lost sight of each other ; for habit and early interest, had cemented the ties of affection, forging, in adamantine rivets, the links of fellow¬ ship. The baron accompanied the lady Isabel to Nuneaton, anxiety augmenting every hazard which public turmoil could interpose : besides, he wished once more to crave the blessing of his pious mother, and ere he descended to the grave, to visit Warwick Castle, and sojourn with the father of his lost Alice. The pangs of bleeding memory were as nought in the competition with imagined duty ; it was
was a sacrifice due to the peace of others, and however feeling might shrink, reso* lution urged to the triaL The sun, emerging from his bed of mists, burnished the turrets of Hanslape with his broad bright glories, as De Mau dit and Hubert, from the top of the war¬ der's tower, watched the litter of Isabel, slowly·- descending the steep : the baron, mounted on a palfrey, moved beside her ; and the bright arms of the retinue, glit¬ tering and sparkling, marked their track, long after distance had mingled them with common ether. Fears bedewed the cheeks of William : Hubert stood with his arms folded, with his eyes fixed, until the last scintillation vanished, and then he sighed, and turned away in de* spondence. " It is but a temporary privation, my sons," said father Gilbert, attentively surveying them. w I hate privation," thoughtlessly ex¬ claimed De Maudit. " Yet
"Yet is privation the lot of man," re¬ joined the confessor ; " from the cradle, even unto the grave." " Then why seek it?—why make it? —why ------" " Seek it—make it," interrupting him ; " what meanest thou ?" " I mean, that Isabel might as well have tarried at Hanslape." " My lord the baron judges other¬ wise," said father Gilbert ; " and the judgment of youth is at best imperfect' " The judgment of man is altogether imperfect," observed the malapert boy. " True, my son," gravely and firmly : " yet if the judgment of man be imper¬ fect, the judgment of inexperienced un¬ reflecting youth, must be folly. Know- est thou not," and reproof spoke in his eye, " a son's first duty is obedience ?" " I can be very obedient," exclaimed William, " if it militate not against my own pleasure : but if* as you tell me, and as my father tells me, life is short, and thick
thick set with sorrows, whv should we woo those sorrows, to our own despite ?" "Life ends not here," pronounced the confessor : " this world be but the pre¬ paration for eternity. Thou art young, and thoughtless, and hurried away by buoyant and versatile spirits : 'tis the in¬ firmity of the flesh ; 'tis the weakness of humanity : alas ! we toil and we labour ; w r e heap up repentance and misery, through our own misdeeds." " No, no," eagerly, " I w r ould toil and labour for happiness; for happiness, alone, dear father; what repentance could come of Isabel's remaining with us at Hanslape ?" iA My lord the baron," replied father Gilbert, " wills the lady Isabel a more befitting study, than the sports and pas¬ times of boyhood ; neither is it for thee to question his motives, or to gainsay his actions." " But do tell me, dearest sir, why Isabel is torn from us? and why she could
could not pursue her studies here, as well as at Nuneaton ?" " Have I not already said, the wiU of the baron consigns her to the guardian¬ ship erf her ghostly grandmother: be¬ sides, if explanation be necessaiy,at Nun¬ eaton, she will best acquire the accom¬ plishments befitting her rank and sex." * Ah ! but at Nuneaton, she will not be so happy as at Hanslape : not a nun at St. Mary's, can love her half so well as Hubert and I." " There exists no protest against a brother's love," mildly observed the con¬ fessor: " cherish it then, my poor child, in distance, and in absence«" * The mom I love Isabel," said Wil¬ liam, " the more cruel becomes her im¬ prisonment If I was a man, I would— I W oa!d ------ n "What wouldst thou do?" question¬ ed father Gilbert. u I would keep Isabel here in the cas¬ tle, in despite of opposition," "And
" And turn rebel to a parent's will?" " Oh no, no !" exdaimed Hubert, for the first time breaking silence, and snatching the arm of his young compa¬ nion ; " have a care, dear William : our kind father has pain enough, without ought inflicted at our hand." " Then," said De Maudit, indignant¬ ly» " you too are content in Isabel's ab¬ sence." " Hubert is submissive, not content," remarked the confessor ; " he owns the wiser judgment of experience, and sa¬ crifices to duty, the mere selfishness of feeling : fbr thee, unthinking boy, self- willed and froward, unless this spirit of independence be curbed and bridled, thou wilt live to nip the glories of thy own promising destiny ; for power, un¬ allied to moderation, rank, uncoupled with humility, is at best, a curse, and a snare. Go ; retire ; seek the solitude of thy chamber ; humble thyself in contri¬ tion, and pray for grace and for favour." But
But De Maudit could not sleep upon the anger of father Gilbert, and long ere the sun had gilded the west, did he seek him in consciousness and in submission : his was the ready acknowledgment, the frank confession, of a heart, prone to error, but untainted by vice ; of a judg¬ ment, the slave of impulsive feeling, yet free from the jaundice of deliberate ma¬ lice. " Enough ! enough !" faltered the man of God : " my blessing be upon thee : cherish ever this sanctifying spirit of peace, and thy faults, alone of the head, will never take root in the heart." Time, the common reconciler to the imperious mandates of necessity, soon softened down the repinings of regret; De Maudit and Hubert, returned to their studies, to their lighter avocations, to their pleasurable pastimes : the morn¬ ings were devoted to the counsels of fa¬ ttier Gilbert ; and recreation spoke, in the sports of the field, and the mimicries of war ;
war; in hurling the dart, and poising the lance. It was the age for chivalry ; and every youthful breast, catching the vivifying spark, burnt with the ardour of conquest : knighthood was the inex¬ tinguishable pharos to emulation, the beacon-ray, crowning the pass to pre¬ eminence, inspiring, instigating, beyond ought of earthly prize; close muffling every peril in the uphill steep, entwin¬ ing immortal laurel, even around the death-stroke. The arrival of the baron, accompanied by the lord Henry de Bellamont, soon gave a brighter colouring, and opened a wider field to the } r oung aspirants for glory : he had consigned the lovely Isa¬ bel to the guardian bosom ofthe church ; he had reaped the rich blessing of his pious mother ; he had sojourned with the father of his lost Alice ; and now, aided by the brother of his lost Alice, he returned to Hanslape, to fulfil the impe¬ rative
rative duties, which his station, and his parental character demanded. Infancy awakens our care, and our tenderness ; calls forth every sensibihty of our nature : but 'tis puberty, 'tis the opening burst of manhood, which adds anxiety and fear to the feelings ! Here¬ tofore, dismissed with the nightly beni¬ son, William and Hubert had lain down to sleep ; had arisen, to fulfil the routine of their infant duties, to obey and to study, to labour out the smile of reward, and the meed of conciliation : now, a new theatre was opening before them ; now, launched upon the world, exposed to the world's follies, to the world's snares, they were to breast the vortex, with no firmer stay, than precept, and deep- grounded integrity. Hanslape trembled, and shrunk aghast from the picture.-*· " Alas ! alas ! my sons," he would ex¬ claim, " the test must be proved, the fearful race must be accomplished"—and then he would humble himself in prayer and
and in fasting, deprecating wrath, and invoking the favour of heaven. " My nephew must not live in hermit seclusion," said De Bellamont; "must not be immured, like a priest's relic- quary." The baron only sighed. " He must maintain a character of his own ; he must toil out his own glory : yield him to me, my lord, and I will fashion liim for coming action." He paused, but Hanslape continued silent. " Here," pursued lord Henry, " the simple cur¬ rency ofthe world is excluded : he must mingle with men; he must rub away the rust of pedantry ; he must woo society, and reap the polish of urbanity and independence." 4i And sacrifice bis virtue at the fla¬ gitious shrine of custom?" asked the apprehensive father, " Virtue, untried," replied De Bella¬ mont, " is but a nominal appendage. Look to your own youth, my lord, and confess, whether the limit of Hanslape could
could have satisfied your hopes, coukl ??? extinguished the native fire of an¬ ticipation and ardour?' 4fc Perhaps not," said the baron. " But De Maudit lacks decision : the slave of impulse, he owns no shield, to w^rd off the machinations ofthe wily; besides, his youth ill befits him to the guidance of his own actions." " Then must he glean knowledge in ex¬ perience," rejoined De Bellamont ; " *?? time he break from the ieadingstrings of restraint—God woi ! 1 v.as the carver of my own fortune, tre I had numbered as many summers.' " William," thoughtiuhy observed the baron," is too young, tu plunge into life without a pilot." " I will be the pilot/ eagerly resumed lord Henry—" 1 w ill Mter the gay bark, clear from the shoals «¿hd the breakers nay, and Hubert too, ii you will submit him to my keeping. " Not both," said Hanslape, shudder*
ing; ír oh, no, no, my age must not be so desolate! Hubert must abide at the castle—Hubert must beguile me of m v cares." " Knows he the mysteiy of his des¬ tiny ?" asked De Bellamont—" knows he his slender claim upon his benefactor?" " Slender," repeated the baron, re¬ proach, speaking in his accent, lingering in bis eye: " how little do you know my heart ! how little do you decipher my feelings! I love Hubert, with a love, scarce secondary to the love I bear my own children : compassion rivets the claim wmch helplessness awakened: I received him at the foot of the cross : and by that blessed symbol of our faith, I would not, for the prie* of worlds, repay his gratitude with coldness or neglect!" " Then he knows himself cast upon your bounty and protection," quickly rejoined lord Henry ; " he knows him¬ self, without family, without a name, deserted
deserted by his natural ties, neglected by those who owe him service," " He thinks himself an orphan," re¬ plied the baron : tc but well he knows himself dear to every member of the household. Gifted by nature, beyond the ordinary lot of mortals, with a mind enlarged and comprehensive; with a heart be3 r ond all price ; he has profited by the lessons of father Gilbert ; he has stored himself, with the bee's diligence, against the storms of adverse fortune. Yet have I spared him the pain of in¬ certitude; for to have raised the veil, would have despoiled him of his peace." tí Surely, he ought to know the iso¬ lation of his fate," rejoined De Bella¬ mont;. u surely, he ought to be possessed of every clew, which can unravel the tangled web of his destiny." ** He shall be possessed of all which I can furnish," exclaimed the baron ; *' ere he enter upon the world, he shall know every intricacy in the dark story; he shall
shall see the relics I have religiously preserved ; and may God gift him with resignation and fortitude in the trial!" " If the mind speak in the actions," observed lord Henry; "if, like a title- page, the heart be read in the counte¬ nance, ill will the ardent spirit of Hubert brook the listless blank of mere and utter dependance." *' Father Gilbert would tell you," said Hanslape, " that the mind and heart of Hubert is composed of all that is esti¬ mable and great ; that his pride, is the pride of virtue; that his study, is the benefit of his fellow-creatures ! Would to Heaven, De Maudit possessed half his forbearance, half his consideration ! then could I see him depart from Hanslape without a pang," " De Maudit may err from the head, but not from the heart," quick rejpiised De Bellamont —" De Maudit may be led away by example, never, by delibe¬ rate guilt." vol. L ? ** Still
" Still, will the thorn be sharp, will the pang be pungent. Saints and mar¬ tyrs!" and the baron trembled as he spoke, " to see my boy despoiled of his peaœ —to know him the slave of care- to know him, writhing under the misery of his own misdeeds; rather, far rather, would I place him at the side of my buried Alice," " You are so sensitive, my lord ; you are so alive to the tortures of anxiety. Why picture guilt—wby dream of mi¬ sery? William may tread the busy track of life, may woo the haunts of society, may mingle in the buzz of his fellow- men, without taint to his principles, or hazard to his peace," " You are not a father," said Hans¬ lape, feelingly. ** Time has been, when my cares were as few, my thoughts as light: but tbat time has passed away, and left me, all care, all thought, all apprehension." " And yet is your trust in Heaven unshaken,"
unshaken," remarked De Bellamont; " is your dependance, upon the all- searching power of Omnipotence, un¬ subdued." * e It is my shield in the strife, my haven in the tempest," piously rejoined the baron. " Without religion, man is as the light surge, blown and scattered by every blast which gathers ; his hopes, as baseless ; his reliance, as vain and as perishable as himself. I feel—I acknow¬ ledge my own insufficiency— ï weep in the bonds of my sin; yet confidently casting myself upon the known mercy of my Creator, I pray that affliction come not in the shape of my children." The hour of departure arrived, and even the buoyant spirit of De Maudit was cast down at the heavy gloom shrouding the features of the baron : he read regret too in the eyes of Hubert ; and he broke from the admonitions of father Gilbert with a saddened heart. The sky w r as cloudless; the sun, gaily ? 2 dappling
dappling the castle turrets, shone on the retinue assembled in the court-yard: lord Henry de Bellamont, impatient of longer delay, stood, with his hand on the flowing mane of his fleet courser; yet William, softened and subdued, shrunk not from the close fold of a parent's parting embrace.—" Have a care, my son," faltered Hanslape : " you go, to run the race allotted, to fulfil your destiny here upon earth : in ought which may betide you, whether prosperous or adverse, forget not your own insignifi¬ cance : remember man is insufficient of himself; his strength, weakness; his very wisdom, folly ; a breath may blast the labours ofhis life ; a moment may return him back to his kindred dust." " I will be all you wish," pronounced De Maudit ; " I will fashion my very thoughts by your example, and regu¬ late all my actions by your precepts; I will ------» <« Not so—not so"—and the baron spoke
spoke in humbleness of mind—" there are better guides, there are purer ori¬ ginals—the saints, the Saviour of the world! Tread in the footway of the pious, and labour ever for the promised sanctification : pray for strength in the faith ; pray for a bridle of adamant on the passions ; pray, that you may stem the billows of temptation, and martyi the flesh in the cause of holiness. Call upon Heaven, to invigorate and to strengthen every just resolve; to aid you in the strife; that you may live with death in your sight ; that you may pierce beyond the shadows of time ; that you may weigh the interests, and the pursuits, and the passions of this world, as thistle-down in the balance with eter¬ nity ; that you may become—" * e Doubt me not," exclaimed William; " doubt not my zeal ; doubt not my re¬ solution; doubt------" But the baron waved him to silence.— *' Not of yourself, vain boy : have I not ?? told
told you, the wisdom of man is folly ? not of yourself, but of him, * who is mighty to save:' humble yourself, in lowliness, in self-abasement ; for to God be the glory of every attribute! we honour him, when we comply with his ordinances ; we reverence him, when we bow unmurmuring to his dispensations ; we love him, when we set him ever be¬ fore our sight; we w r orship him, when we divorce our souls from ought of ter¬ restrial things; we proclaim his mercy, when under a just sense of guilt, we make him our stay and our refuge ; we glorify his immensity and omniscience, when the knowledge of his all-searching eye, restrains us from the commitment of hidden sin. Son of my angel Alice, may your labours be the labours of righteousness; may your gleanings be the gleanings of peace !" He paused— he strained him in agony to his bosom ; every r limb trembled ; every feature was convulsed.—" Oh, my God !" he aspi¬ rated,
rated, " take under thy safe conduct the son of my Alice : be with him, through every intricacy of his earthly pilgrim¬ age ; strengthen him in every warfare of the spirit ; shield him from the evils of the world; guard him from all dere¬ liction, from all apostasy: be his life dedicated to religion ; his deeds wholly acceptable unto thee ; that on the bed of death, be may review them with satis¬ faction ; in tbe gloom of the grave, they may be as a shining light, unto the full and perfect day !" " Your blessing—your blessing, dear¬ est father!" implored William, smiling through the tears which gemmed his cheeks. Hanslape placed his spread hand upon the uncovered head of his son ; he raised his eyes in silent but fervent invocation; then abruptly turning away, shaming in the subdued feelings of the man, he hurried to his own oratory. Hubert stood in the courtyard, gazing ? 4 on
on the gorgeous retinue ; sighing at the fiat of separation; trembling for the peace of William ; dreading, yet knowing not why, the flight of time : he stretched forth his arms, his every feature radiant in sensibility^ and for many moments, the friends were clasped in a warm em¬ brace ; it seemed, as though every nearer tie was forgotten, as though the close cemented rivets of childhood's affection grew into strength, " Brother of my soul !" faltered Wil¬ liam ; " companion of my best and bright¬ est hours ! would that I could bear you with me—would that I could share with you, the dazzling charm of my promised fortune !" Hubert pressed his hand in eloquent gratitude.—" In the world, in the haunts of men, in the turbulence of faction," he whispered, " respect a father's preju¬ dices; reflect ever on a fathets peace." De Maudit looked up with animation, the smile of confidence and security, playing,
playing, like summer lightning, o'er his features.—" What have I to do with the turbulence of faction ?" he asked : " fear me not, I will steer through the shoals and the shallows of political jars. I will have nought to do with the fe¬ derate barons, for the standard of my house streams on the side of loyalty : what though I meet with Gloucester, or with Leicester; think you, I have no judgment of my own?" " Aye, and principle, and honour, and feeling," pronounced Hubert : " but we know not the subtilties of design." " I defy all their machinations, and all their interventions," boldly exclaimed William. " Let them spread their lime- twigs ; let them gild their lures : * in vain the snare is set in the sight of any bird" —and his smile was the smile of self- security, " My lord your father," rejoined Hu¬ bert w was tbe disciple of the great and the virtuous earl of Pembroke : walking ? 5 in
in his footsteps, he would know his son firm to the legitimate monarch who wields the sceptre of his native land; he ------" " I cry thy mercy, my good nephew," exclaimed De Bellamont, abruptly break¬ ing the conference ; ** bestir, lest the sun decline, ere we darken the portals of Hanslape ! Marry come up, but thy tongue is as glib as a woman's : were I a shriver of consciences, I would assign thee a penance of silence !" De Maudit laughed, spite of the tears which ga- theied in his eyes ; again he grasped the hand of Hubert, and the next instant, vaulting into his saddle, he quitted the court-yard, and moving at the side of his uncle, soon lost «sight of the home of his happiest days.
CHAP-
CHAPTER IX.
Each siibbtance of a grief hath twenty shadows, Whieh shew hke £i*ief itself, but are not so: For sorrow's eye, glazed with blinding tears, Divides one thing entire to many objects. SlIAKr-SPEAUE. '' —,-----. —-Life is a fitful scene í Time, the common spoiler of things earthly!'* Hubert, chasing every tear from his cheek, lured back the sunny smile of content, ere he sought the presence of the baron: he found him seated at a marble slab; his hands clasped, and his eyes steadfastly rivetted upon the illu¬ minated pages of a missal, adorned with rich bosses and clasps of gold, which lay open before him. So intent and so ab* stracted was he from ought of earth, that he perceived not the advance of the ? 6 youth ι
youth ; his cheeks were wan almost unto death, and his eveiy feature wore the cast of care and thoughtfulness,—" A child of wrath," he murmured ; " a vessel fitted for destruction." An inward shud¬ der iced the blood in bis veins; he slid from his seat upon his knees ; he cast on heaven a look fraught with faith and holiness.—" Oh, my God !" he pronoun¬ ced ; " thou, who knowest best the cor¬ rection I most need ; the sinful disorders, the manifold trespasses, the follies, the perversities of my soul—thou alone canst root out the disease—thou alone canst adjudge the remedy ! Father of angels and of men ! teach me to bow submis¬ sive to the stroke of thy hand ; not be¬ cause thy will is law ; but because, the stroke, fashioned in mercy, is given to bless and to chasten." " Amen!" ejaculated Hubert, scarcely conscious of the sound which passed his lips ; it was his spirit which drank in the wrapt devotion ofhis benefactor; it was bis
his whole heart, his well regulated mind, which seconded his just reliance upon Omnipotence, Hanslape arose—his hand extended— his eyes surcharged with tears.—" You too will pray for our absent William," he said; " you, my son, not less beloved, but far more trusted." A quickening blush flushed the cheek of Hubert. It was the latent love of praise, stamping weakness inherent— " Yes, and for Isabel," he exclaimed— " I will pray, too, my lord, for grace, to proclaim, in every act, my gratitude for favour." 46 Dearest Hubert," said the baron, " in your love, in your ready obedience, in your dawning virtue, long, has ought of obligation been requited." Hubert kissed the hand he held ; his heart was full : he believed himself an orphan, but he knew not the secret of his birth, for scrupulously had affection spread a veil over the mysteries of the copse-
copse-wood.—" Not the devotion of a long life," he fervently pronounced; " not the ready sacrifice of every worldly good, can absolve my duty here. No, my lord, the tie of kindred is far less sacred : nature labours for her own : 'tis benevolence, 'tis philanthropy, shedding balm on the desolate, which claims all that devoted gratitude can offer." The baron was softened, even unto weeping.—" Dear boy," he faltered, " be unto me a son ; be unto De Maudit, be unto Isabel, a brother, in deed, and in affection." " Even unto death," solemnly rejoin¬ ed Hubert : " in every chance, in every vicissitude of this changeful state, be the claim dearer than life." " Hubert," said the baron, " strangely does my mind misgive me, if your heart be not probed in the eause of William. I tremble for his peace ; yet how, alas ! could I withhold him from the impor¬ tunities of his uncle ? So ardent, so im« petuous,
petuous, so open to sophistry, so aHve to sanguine delusive anticipation ; breaking upon the world, without one suspicion, one safeguard to peace. They class me a moody, melancholy, misanthropic spi¬ rit," pursued Hanslape, after a pause of deep thought ; " they fancy, because the consciousness of my own demerits has given the remnant of my life to prayer, tbat I am soured with the world, that I am voluntarily divorced from my own species! The cord," forcing a sickly smile, " makes not the friar, nor the cowl the monk. I am no misanthrope, I am no declaimer of my fellow-men : I know that virtue still lives upon the earth ; but the dove was three days ere she lighted on the olive-branch." " Mean you," asked Hubert, " that human excellence is rare, and hard to be met with ?" ** I mean," rejoined the baron s " that the currency of this world corrupts our best purposes, that design waylays our purest
purest intentions, that hypocrisy tangles in her hidden folds. I cannot shape my fears ; and yet, my son, my fears, combat and destroy my hopes ; they crowd upon me; they overwhelm, they press me down." Hubert gazed upon his benefactor, with a moist eye and a bleached cheek ; impulsively he grasped his arm, and he looked, rather than said, " Is the mys¬ tery of my birth, ought concerned in the sorrows of your life?" A deep, a startling sigh, burst from the heart of Hanslape.—" In youth," he mournfully pronounced, " sorrow is poignant; in age, sorrow is hopeless! Holy God! great is the weakness, great the imperfections of our nature : we cast away the happiness of our lives, and tlien we murmur at its miseries. My sorrows are of my own framing : bliss made me dizzy, made me neglectful of my duty : I fancied it must kst for ever, because it was in the circle of my own arms.
arms. Hubert, Hubert, though you should number out the threescore and ten years allotted, forget not, man is an atom, a grain of sand, in the scale of immensity." " My friend ! my dear, my honoured, my inestimable friend!" and Hubert sunk on his knees, and buried his face in the dark folds of the baron's garment —·" forgive the selfish hand which would probe your sorrows ; pity the imperative call, which would rend afresh your wounds." " You would raise the veil of my destiny," reproachfully exclaimed Hans¬ lape : " unthinking, merciless boy, you ■ .....» " I would but question of my own lineage," interrupting him : " no, no, my lord; sacred be your woes; sacred be your trials : heaven bear me witness, not for the ransom of a prince, would I ex¬ tort one tear." " Be it a part of my penance," feel¬ ingly
ingly resumed the baron. " Hubert, I have sinned—I have laden myself with crime and with woe^—I have impiously flown in the face of heaven~I have slighted the counsels of prophecy—I have stored up destruction to my own felicity. You shall hear it all ; you shall know it all : tarry but a fitter season ; tarry until the snow and the ice shall have yielded to the sweet blossoms of May ; tarry until the fast of St, Dun¬ stan; and then, stealing an hour from prayer, will I warn you, lest you too slip into a mesh alike deadly : then will I tell you the fearful trammel of my youth, and disclose all that is dire in my fate-fraught story; tarry in patience, dearest boy, content to know, that your claim upon my heart, is, and ever will be, imperative." The separation of friends, the absence of those we love, gradually loosens the links of our happiness; for however prosperous be our destiny, it instilleth the
the lesson, that privation, and regret, and anxiety, and endurance, is the por¬ tion allotted unto man! Life, in its pristine summer, unobscured and un« ruffled, holds forth a picture, pure as the first Eden; radiant in brightness, daz¬ zling in hope, 'tis a fairy charm upon the senses, wedding to earth, the thoughts and the wishes, binding the spirit and the fancy in rose-clustering bonds ! The storm comes, and the illusion vanishes : we read the perishable tenure of our hold; we decipher the errors of our judgment; we behold the world in its true colours; we sicken at the mere shadows which late beguiled; v/e turn from transitory to permanent joy—we turn to heaven, as a beacon, shining and beckoning through the chaos ! Time waned, but time reconciled not the absence of De Maudit. Hubert felt alone and lonely ; in bis hours alike of study and of recreation, in his rambles in the woods, in his visits to the hamlet, in
in coursing the stag, or in aiming the dart, he missed the light pleasantry of his gay companion : the smile and the jest lived ever on the lips of William : full of ardour, full of animation ; hasty in his resolves, adventurous in his pur¬ suits ; if the loss of the infantine caresses of Isabel had been a draft on the peace of Hubert, the loss of the society of WUliam, was a draft upon his quiet. " The castle seems changed," he ob¬ served, in reply to the lament of the aged Geoffiy ; " the sun shines less gaily; nature herself wears a darker colouring ; ti»s very earth seems clad in gloom." " Ah I and it must be so, and it will be so, until the return of our dear boy," faltered Geoffry. " God send, he bear back as light a spirit !" " Why should we fear it other, gooå Geoffry ?" asked Hubert " De Maudit sojourns but a little season in the castle of his grandsire, and then he returns to Hanslape, to cheer and to enliven all." "God
" God send it be sol' again burst from the lips of the venerable domestic. " Spirits as light, and hearts as gay, have been nipped, ere the full summer of their bloom." Hubert looked anxiously towards him. Geoffiy shook back his grizzled locks, and clasped his hands in melancholy forebodance.—·** I am an old man, totter¬ ing on the brink of eternity," he pur¬ sued— " I have seen the mother, I have seen the brother, of the dear boy, strick- ened, like May's sweetest blossoms, by a ruthless night-frost—I have seen them shrouded side by side—I have followed them to the last rest of nature. Saints and martyrs!" and his voice faltered, and his cheeks and his lips grew pale, " 'twas in the very springtide of happi¬ ness and hope, that the storm gathered ; that bursting, unsuspected, it nearly crushed us all." " But why look to the past ?" said Hubert—" why crowd the gloomy haze of
ofthe past, on the bright horizon ofthe future?" " I cannot forget the past," mourn¬ fully rejoined Geoffry ; " I cannot forget the sweet saint, on whose errand of mercy, I journeyed from Nuneaton. Alas ! alas ! that the lily, so rare, should be broken ; whilst I, old, and worn, and worthless, like unto a stunted withered branch, still buffet the peltings of'the tempest" " It is not for us to cavil at the wonder-working dispensations of Pro¬ vidence," observed Hubert. " Father Gilbert would tell us, e the race is not to the swift, or the battle to the strong." " True, most true," sighed Geoffry ; " neither can power, rank, or riches, ward off the death-stroke. Blessed Mary ! I have traced it in more instances than one : peace tarries not a man's bid¬ ding; and princes, and kings themselves, am but men! For a season, my dear lord, was happy, grateful, cheerful ; pour¬ ing
ing down the t balm and the honey of prosperity, upon every destitute so¬ journer ; living to bless and to solace ; his largesses, unlimited; his philanthropy, like the sun's rays, shining and smiling upon all! Hanslape was as a rallying point to the sore-laden : and my angel mistress^—oh ! she w r as the very hand¬ maid of mercy's self! so gentle, so mild, solender! her grave has been steeped in the tears of suffering nature; her me¬ mory lives embalmed in many a grateful heart: even now, after such a lapse of years, her name alone, maketh the wi¬ dow's heart to thrill with thankfulness." " It is tbe best monument of worth," remarked Hubert—" the brightest ce¬ notaph of virtue !" " It was a blessed season," pursued Geoffry, bis cheeks glowing, his eyes kindling at the bare revisai of the past— " I myself grew almost young again. God help me! I thought myself old then; and yet, since then, have I la* boured
boured out full eighteen winters : aye, and winters, in seeming and in truth, for the frost and the snow has been far less desolate than our feelings.*' " Yet," said Hubert, " does heaven minister an unction to every wound." Geoffry dashed the tear from his eye, and stifled down the sob of his bosom.— " I was at the foot of the wardets tower,** he faltered, " when my blessed lady spied out the venturous child. I heard her shriek : it rings in my ears now; it will ring in my ears unto death. ï saw her fly with the speed of light—* I watched her—I strove^—I—I- -----" He paused, his fortitude, his every power, subdued by the pang of remem¬ brance, " Surely," urged Hubert, " after such a lapse of years, resignation and acqui· escence becomes our bounden duty; surely——" *' Aye, where the sting genders not in our own deeds," interrupted the baron,
advancing at the instant : " but where reproach, where remorse, blackens the die of sorrow, the effect is eternal," Hu¬ bert started—Geoffry, uttering a fearful cry, buried bis face in his vest " Fear not, my old friend," pursued Hanslape; "the past cannot be given to oblivion : it lives in my breast, as well as in thine: years have transpired, but the pang remains the same, un¬ changed, unchanging ; for memory out¬ lives the flight of time, and scoffs at the vain efforts of human reason," " Say not vain," implored Hubert, scarce conscious of the words he uttered : " chastening comes not in wrath, but mercy; it weans from the delusions of sense ; It loosens the bonds of tbe world ; it reco nei los us, il fits us, it——it——" He hesitated, and tbe crimson flush of his cheek, bore sjieaking testimony of tremulous fear ; murmuring something of presumption, he paused, as though himself a culprit. vol. ι. i* " Speak
" Speak on, strange boy," urged tbe baron : v '* fain would I learn my duty, even from lips so young P' " Your duty ! ob, my lord !" and tears gathered in the eyes of Hubert. " I d re'» m t not reproach," said the baron, " neither did I breathe ought of irony. If from tbe mouths of sucklings, man may educe wisdom ; surely wisdom erietli aloud, in the deeds and the coun¬ sels of piety : proceed, my son ; arraign without fear; admonish without shame." " I would but recall tbe exordiums of the holy Gilbert,*' timidly rejoined Hubert—" í would but echo his hopes. and remind ofthe rich promises of here¬ after recompense: forgive me, my lord; my zeal to extrae*: the thorn of remem¬ brance, hurries me into a course, in wbicb inexperience and presumption alone speak." " Say rather, affection and anxiety," resumed Hanslape. " I have not to learn, your obedience, and your ready acqui-
acquiescence in my will. Tbe hour wbich gave you to my keeping, gave to my heart, its cordial balm : dearest Hu¬ bert, it has been, it is, as a bright ray, shining through the dark clouds of my destiny ; it has dissipated the murmurs of dissatisfaction ; it has curbed the wild horrors of despair; it has savoured of returning mercy, even when heaven, when fate herself, seemed to war against me!" Hubert's whole soul beamed in bis eyes; bis pulses quickened, hi.-, every feature glowed witb the magic thrill of praise; he grasped tba lurid of his be¬ nefactor; be bent bis knee, as solemnly he pronouiiced, " May 1 live to fulfil your hopes ! may I live, to reap, as now, tbe coveted recompense of your ap¬ proval !" " Doubt it not—fear it not. my son," resumed tbe baron : " nature has gifted you above the ordinary lot of humanity; vigorous, yet tempered * ^nbnf, yet sub- L ~ missive;
missive ; forgetful of self, zealous in tbe furtherance of virtue, in you, w T ill passion ever own the check-rein of reason; will the headlong energies of youth, be ever fashioned by the mild and ??? sway of moderation." " Your dependance anchors upon a rock, my lord," exclaimed Geoffry, as Hubert, blushing and diffident, shrunk away from tbe siren sound of his own «w # praise. " Tbat dear youtli, even from tbe cradle, betrayed a mind, shaped for exertion; a disposition, replete in all that was glorious and great. Sbould circumstances ever call him into action; should lie be cast into tbe world ; should he be hurried far from his quiet home, from h Ls early associates, the lessons of father Gilbert, and the kindness of his benefactor, will bhine, ever, as a quench¬ less light, before bis eyes." "How hurried away? bow plunged into the world? how expelled his early home ?" asked the baron, shuddering at the
the bare anticipation, " In the time of my natural life, in tbe time of De Mau¬ dits natural life, Hanslape will ever be the home of Hubert." " Man, my lord, knows not his des¬ tiny," said Geoffry ; " he reads the pre¬ sent, but he guesses not the coming page : tbe ties of kindred may not al¬ ways lie hid; tbe mystery of the copse- wood may yet be unravelled," " And 1 be deprived of my boy," pronounced the baron, with such a look, and in such a tone of sorrow, that the next instant, he blushed at tbe seeming selfishness. Geoffry dared not speak, although his heart breathed reprehen¬ sion: lie might have asked, can self- gratification triumph over all tlmt is most estimable in character? but he checked tbe feeling, and his look, and his sigh, and his melancholy shake of the bead, alone bore evidence of his thoughts.—" You condemn me," said the baron ; " you think me unjust, and L % cruelly
cruelly indifferent, to the welfare of my beloved charge.** " I did not say so, my lord " " True, Geoffry; not with your tongue, but your looks needeth no expounder : believe me, my old friend, it was but the random impulse of the moment. I pray, I fervently pray, my nature be not so barren of all which is good and just." " Your nature," faltered Geoffry : " my lord; my dear lord ;" and then he paused, for his eyes and his heart w f ere alike fulL He had loved, he had revered the de¬ parted baroness ; and now% tbat love, that reverence, was transferred to her mourn¬ ing widower : he saw, and he deplored, those eccentricities, so inimical to re¬ pose; but be estimated his virtues, and he honoured him, as a being, bleeding beneath tbe sure martyrdom of an acute sensibility. " I read all vou would say," resumed the baron—" I trace my acquittal—I joy in the approval of an honest heart." " Your
* ( Your acquittal, my lord : ali ! wound me not, by so glaring a conviction of my own presumption; reproach me, brand me, with indiscretion, with in¬ solence, with busy meddling interfer¬ ence ; but do not—do not, crave of me acquittal." " Think you," asked Hanslape, for¬ cing a melancholy smile, " that wealth or situation exalts beyond the reach of censure? that the praise of virtue is less desirable, because clothed in the humble guise of servitude? No, my honest friend, virtue is the best badge of human distinction; a preeminence, far higher, far more estimable, than the jewelled diadem of majesty ; elevating poverty above wealth ; stamping mediocrity, far more dazzling than hereditary honours." " And yet," remarked Geoffry, " Pro¬ vidence, instituting earth-born distinc¬ tions, enjoins obedience and homage." " True; but not blindness, not wilful blindness, to imperfection and to error, L 4 It
It is not the ermine of royalty which can muffle the degradations of vice; it is not rank, or wealth, or power, which can qualify crime. If obedience be the virtue of the humble, example is the bounden duty of the exalted : placed above the myriad, like some bright star, resplendent in glory, heavy be tbe re¬ cognizance, where the track lure to im¬ morality; where it tangle in tbe rank tares of sensuality and guilt," " Ab, my lord !" fervently pronounced Geoffry, " your track on earth winds but to heaven ; for it is trodden, in devout lowliness, and in humbleness of spirit. * The first letter of De Maudit was penned in the warm and spontaneous language of the heart : it enumerated every inmate of the castle; it noted, scenes, long passed, and almost forgot¬ ten ; it bore testimony of deep and ge¬ nuine feeling; and however deep and genuine
genuine feeling may be perverted, it cannot be erased. " No, no," said the baron, in the wrarm pride of affection, " my boy loves us ; bears us in his heart, amid the varia¬ tions, and vicissitudes, and chances, and changes, of the busy world." " Though I mingle with the gay and the prosperous," wrote William; " though I share the caresses of my indulgent grandsire, and partake of all the pleasures and all the pastimes of rank, still recollection flies back to Hanslape—flies to the dear, dear scenes, whicii neither time or circumstances can ever expunge. Nightly do I miss the peace-yielding blessing of my father--** daily do I miss the counsels of the holy Gilbert—hourly do I miss the commen¬ dations of the faithful Geoffry—and momentarily do I miss the society and the friendship of my brother Hubert : perhaps time may turn my repinings into submission ; but at present, joyfully L 5 would
would I exchange all my new associates» for the comfort and the quietude of the pas w " Strange," mused Hubert, chasing a tear from his cheek ; " and yet he departed, with a buoyant spirit, and a light heart." " The scenes by which I am sur¬ rounded; the characters with whom I associate; are so novel, and so diversi¬ fied/' wrote De Maudit ; " so opposite to the scenes and the companions of my youth : pride, and ambition, and violence, and extortion, triumph unmasked in the world ; religion serves as the cloak for policy; and man himself, thinks, and acts, and lives, a new creature. My uncle laughs at what he calls the con¬ traction of habit and the bias of educa¬ tion ; but I cannot side with the laxity of opinion, neither can I forswear the rigidity of early rule : perhaps 1 am differently fashioned to the youths with whom I hold fellowship, but I cannot forget
forget the customs and the observances at Hanslape." " May he never forget them!" ex¬ claimed the baron, clasping his hands in fervent invocation ; " may they, taking root in his breast, bud and blossom to hereafter glory! But proceed, dearest Hubert, for my heart would fain follow through all and every calling." " My time and strength are devoted to martial sports ; for the aspect of human affairs lowers, and the king's fatal bias in favour of foreigners, stirs all of gall in the breasts of our legitimate nobles : but I am no politician ; and I hear the growl of disapprobation, and the bodings of fear, with a calm and a temperate pulse : 'tis well, to poise the lance and hurl the spear, to be perfect in the art of defence ; but God grant, the soil of England, be never crimsoned through civil discord Ρ " Amen " ejaculated the baron ; and Hubert, pausing, with the vellum in his hand, turned attentively towards him· L 6 *' When
" When 1 lived in the world ; when I threaded the intricacies of the court," pursued Hanslape, " I saw nought to disapprove or to lament: the royal Henry, influenced by the staid counsels of the noble Pembroke, yielded the helm to the earl of Kent ; and however mur¬ mur might gender, tbe reality of pros¬ perity smothered every discontent : but time works strange changes, and life itself is but a shifting drama." " You knew the earl of Kent, my lord ?" asked Hubert. A slight convul¬ sion passed over the features of the baron, and the blood faded from his cheeks. " The earl of Kent," he faltered, " was the chosen friend of the lord Henry de Bellamont : he was at Warwick Castle, when in the possession of my Alice, heaven left me nought to sigh for : the earl of Kent------" he paused, and Hu¬ bert, regretting the enquiry, returned to the vellum with seeming eagerness. "The
" The lord Richard de Clare, son of the earl of Gloucester, and the lords, Henry, and Simon, and Guy de Mont- ford, in the absence of their father, the earl of Leicester, are now sojourning at Warwick. They have but newly quit¬ ted the court, and they speak freely and unreservedly of the self-willed and ar¬ bitrary proceedings of the king : like myself, they r are young and inexperi¬ enced; but unlike myself, they wage opinions with dictatorial law. Perhaps, they lack the blessing, of such a tutor as the holy Gilbert; and such an en- sample of meekness and humility, as from youth up, has met me in the form of my honoured father : for report says, the earl of Leicester, is a man, who craveth more after temporal than spi¬ ritual good : certain it is, he toileth after the loaves and the fishes, labouring, to the utmost of his means, for tbe enno¬ blement and advancement of his family. Yet, nevertheless« more than once, has he
he fallen under the displeasure of the royal Henry : and his castle of Kenil¬ worth, is now manned and garrisoned, like unto a citadel marked for bombard¬ ment, rather than the proud domain of a loyal noble. God's truth! without impugning the principles in which I have been born and reared, England groans beneath her grievances : the king, revoking the charter of liberties, has given universal umbrage, and scattered discontent throughout the realm : justice itself grows saleable: and such is his blind love, and his lavish prodigality on foreign favourites, that the murmur, gen¬ dered, and spreading, and passing from tongue to tongue, is, that our inherit¬ ance is converted io aliens, and our houses to strangers;* Hubert dropped the vellum, for the baron groaned aloud: he sprang from his seat; he paced the chamber with a hurried stride.—" Spirits of paradise !" he ejaculated, " do I live, to know the poison
poison of disaffection infused into the veins of my own son ; to hear * the Lord's anointed/ accused of misrule, stigmatized with the foul blot of in¬ justice?* " Äly life on the loyalty of De Maudit," exclaimed Hubert, snatching bis arm with energetic fervour. " Trust me, my lord, he reports the sentiments of others, rather than his own." " God grant it be so !" sighed Hans¬ lape : " yet I like not the mere seeming ; for disaffection is as a vital stab to the soul of honour." " He cannot shut his ears to the cur¬ rency of the world," eagerly pursued Hubert; " and when he writes, my lord, 'tis pity restraint sbould stay his feel¬ ings." " William lacketh no kinder advo¬ cate," remarked the baron. " Yet should the actions of the king be sacred to the subject : hemmed in by the halo of glory, the lawless daring of opinion, is a vio¬ lation
lation to bounden duty and heaven- sanctioned authority. Believe me, Hu¬ bert, much as I love the son of Alice; dear to my heart, as is the remembrance of his infant promise"—and his voice and his look softened into tenderness— " rather woiild I close bis eyes ; rather would I scatter, cypress, and rue, and funereal bay upon his grave; rather would I mourn him plucked, like an unblown flower, than know him tbe tool and tbe confederate of traitors; rather would I see him, stretched at my feet in death, than know him, tangled in a mesh, of hell's own weaving." Hubert spoke not; bis reason told him, man, prone to error, was ill fa¬ shioned as an ensample of undeviating excellence ; that the monarch, heir alike to the infirmities of humanity, might sink into the one common lapse of blind¬ ness, injustice, and selfish prodigality: but he knew the prejudices of bis early friend, and he dared not even hint that tbe
the voice of rumour might take rise in other than treason. Tbe next transcript of remembrance, steered clear of the court : it spoke nei¬ ther of the royal Henry, of the prince Edward, and bis young bride, Eleanor, sister of Alpbonso king of Castile, or of any r of the courtiers : it spoke of indivi¬ duals, whom time bad not expunged from the memory of the baron, and it rived anew every inward feeling. His early friend, sir Roger Mortimer, bad for¬ sworn tbe boast of " single blessedness ;" had espoused the lady Gladys, sister of David, prince of North Wales, and in* vested in the government of South Wales, had made the strong castle of Me- lyenyth his abiding place. Hanslape joyed in the prosperity and in the happi¬ ness of the light-hearted companion of his youth : yet as further be perused tbe vellum, the smile of gratulation fast yield¬ ed to the gathering cloud of care and of regret ; for he learnt» in the death of An¬ selm,
seim, the earl-marshal of England, the total extinction of the noble family of Pembroke : the fall, the ruin, the annihi¬ lation, of every son of his honoured and respected guardian. Five had been born to his hopes, and five had descended is¬ sueless to the grave: William—Walter— and Anselm, by the blight of divine will ; Richard, in Ireland, by the ruthless steel of an assassin; and Gilbert, at Hertford, in a luckless and a fatal tour¬ nament " Mysterious Providence !" ejaculated Hanslape, casting on heaven, a look, replete with reverence and awe—" the dire ban is fully accomplished ; the curse of the bishop of Feras, like the thun¬ derbolt of wrath, has blasted and de¬ stroyed." (e) A coincidence, so sad, and so dire, recalled the foreboding accents of the Knights-Templar : again was he transported to the shrine of the earl- marshal ; and again, did, Vows to heaven, savour not of the vows of this world, knoll,
knoll, as a dirge, to his hopes and to his joys. " Miserable, miserable wretch !" he murmured; " burdened with guilt; crushed beneath the retributive weight of my own sinful negligence." Hubert would have spoken consola¬ tion, but the baron waved him to silence. " I read the woful curse, accomplished, in the early fall of the sons of Pem¬ broke," he pursued; " I read the judg¬ ments of heaven, and I tremble for my own doom." *' Your doom, my lord," repeated the astonished Hubert : " can actions, fa¬ shioned by justice and by reason, elicit ought, save peace and comfort ?" Hans¬ lape buried his face in his spread bands. " Alas ! what have I said ?" pursued the youth. " I would impart consolation, and my words stir up nought but bitterness." Hanslape looked up ; his eyes swam in tears ; his face was wan as marble.-—" Not your
your words, but my own heart," he fal¬ tered ; " not your praise, but the sense of ?? uwii uiivvOTiiJineS;*·, x iviiCW ?? SOUS of the earl of Pembroke—I knew the ex¬ tortion which called down the curse of t lie- Irish prelate. In holy writ, we read of weighty-" judgments : ancl fearful as was the sentence, whieh Elijah, the prophet of God, for Naboth's vineyard, pro¬ nounced against Ahab, so alike fearful, be the retribution, descending on ought of sacrilege!" As he spoke, his very spirit seemed to quail within him ; his limbs were palsied; his every feature convulsed. Hubert sprang to his side, trembling for his senses, almost for his life. 4t Bear with me, my son," implored the baron, gasping down a sob, and wiping the death-dews from his fore¬ head ; * c bear with me for a little season : pray with me ; pray for me ; and on St. Dunstan's fast, the hidden mine shall be revealed." The
The latest dispatch from De Maudit, wore a lighter and a brighter colouring: it comprised a catalogue of pleasures and of pastimes: like tbe former, it trod not upon the precincts of tbe court, but it lingered o'er tbe courtly munificence of tbe earl of Leicester. He had passed a whoie week at tbe castle of Kenilworth ; and he could write of nought, save the graciousness of the royal sister of king Henry, and the resplendent beauty of her ward and god-daughter, the lady Ingeirica Fitzparnel. Hunting, and hawking, and tilting, bad been the sports of the morning; and tbe day, crowned with revelry, had closed with the danee and tbe wassail. The velhon was addressed to Hubert, and it glowed in all the warm imagery of a young and an enthusiastic fancy : the peerless lngelrica bad graced the tilt-yard; and her hand, white as fea¬ thered snow, had bestowed tbe em¬ broidered
broidered scarf, the rich and coveted meed of valour. " The prize is my own," wrote the exulting William, " and I envy no reigning monarch : it was affixed by the fairy finger of beauty ; by a being, fairer than the daughters of earth, and it shall abide with me unto death ! Leicester's countess is gentle and lovely; smiling upon all, she welcomes, with cordial greeting, the friends of,her sons: but the lady lngelrica, like a dazzling star in an ebon sky—like tbe tints of Iris skirting the shower—defies all the flow¬ ers of rhetoric ! I would describe her, could I find words ; but versatile and sportive, as summer lightning, I lose the past impression, in the brighter glory of tbe present! Sometimes she scatters blossoms from her loom ; sometimes ^he mounts her palfrey, and ambles through the extensive park and chase; some¬ times, with the light and buoyant tread of an Atalanta, she flits o'er the verdant sward,
sward, scarce bending beneath her pres¬ sure : ever gay, and ever playful, binding all in the magic spell of witchery, she knows nought of care or of thought: and yet, Hubert, I could fain wish her smile less diffusive ; for whether it be De Clare, or whether it be Henry, or Simon, or Guy de Montford, it beams, like hea¬ ven's favour, upon all !" " This lady Ingeirica," mused Hubert, " strangely monopolizes the time and the thoughts of William. Wby dwell upon a being 1 have never seen ? why converge, every thought, and every sub¬ ject, in the witchery of mere beauty T' But the baron, better versed in the human heart, read the vellum, with a quickened pulse, and an alai med fancy; with a mind, awakened to thought and care: he pierced at once the flimsy veil, so often shutting out love from the eyes ofthe lover; he traced the subtle snare, destructive alike to liberty and to peace. '* I would De Maudit was once more at
at Hanslape!" he exclaimed, uttering aloud his thoughts ; " I would he were here, content and safe, with the com¬ panions of his infancy ! ior at best, the delirious fever of pleasure, is blinding, bewildering, overpowering." " Surely, not when moderately quaffed," observed Hubert; "surely, not when tempered with discretion antl virtue." " Discretion," quickly rejoined the baron, " is seldom the concomitant of youth ; virtue—alas ! my soil, virtue in the world"------He paused—he feared to speak too harshly ; yet eould he only conclude, *' virtue in the world, as gold in the fire, comes forth more pure, or loses its counterfeit burnish."
CHAP-
CHAPTER Χ.
.------------ .» , ..... .. , ---------Do but despair, And, if thou want's t a cord, the smallest thread That ever bpider twisted from her worab Will serve to strangle thee ; u rush will be a beam To hane; thee on : or, wouldbt thou drown thyself, Put but a little water İn a spoon, And it shall be as all the ocean. Shakespeare. T*tt: rich tints of the breezy east, gra¬ dually swelling into radiance, shedding a thousand glories, on every flower, and every blade of grass, begemmed in tbe night-dews, contrasted the gloomy, and almost sepulchral stillness of Hanslape. It was a day, set apart for rigidity, for religious observances, for crucifying the spirit, through the tortures of the flesh ! It was the fast of St. Dunstan ! and the baron, cased in sackcloth, and with ashes strewed upon his head, lay on the tes- VOL. L m sellated
sellated pavement of the chapel, gro¬ velling in dust, mingling his sighs with the breeze, and gazing, with tortured bleeding feeling, on the rest of his lost Alice, It was a day, replete in all the majesty of unclouded brightness ; a day, " in light and heat refulgent ;" yet the baron, stretched, as a penitent, before the host, w r as lost alike, to the splendour of the sky% and the spicy breath of May, scattering **.— ____τ\.|! tbüuï»aïid delicacies, herbs, And írüib, a& iHimt-roub as the drops ot rain, Or beams that -¿ave them birth." Absorbed, in the spirit-killing, strength- impairing lethargy of despair, the victim of blind superstition and bigoted con¬ sciousness, he lived, but in the pangs of remorse, but in the writhing of mental anguish. The whole household too par¬ took ofthe like despondence : not a voice rose higher than a whisper ; not a being quenched his thirst with ought save water,
water, or stayed the calls of hunger but with the lenten fare of pulse and bread : universal was the awe, clinging, like a dire mildew, to every spirit ; weighing, like a mound of lead, on every heart. Even father Gilbert waged not against the decisions of fanaticism ; and each vicissitude of fortune, and each ob¬ structing labyrinth, chequering the earthly path of Hanslape, ivas attributed to the fatal violation of his vow : the retributive wrath of heaven was upon him ; tbe heavy charge of negligence, if not of intentional guilt. He had dis¬ tributed largesses; be Lad endowed re¬ ligious houses; he bad illumined tbe dim eyes of penury; he bad imparted peace to the desolate; he had lightened the burden ofthe sore laden ; yet in his zenith of hope and pleasure, bad the lures of this worid stolen bim from the homage of devotion ; had the glittering incitements of sense, combated and con¬ quered tbe calls of holiness. Wofully m 2 had
had he entailed the forfeit! Alas! in youth he was doomed to expiate; through life he was destined to endure î Hubert arose, with feelings, varied and complex ; with his mind, a chaos of commingling contrarieties, of dread and apprehension, and anxiety and anticipa¬ tion, combining to agitate and to fever. It was the day of promised elucidation ; the day, to unfold the dark intricacies of his story, to bankrupt every sensation, in the one overwhelming spring of gra¬ titude; to explain all his dependency, and all his obligation; to bind him, nearer and firmer, to the fortunes of his benefactor ; to affix around his heart, a chain of adamant, which neither time or circumstances could unloose. He too partook of the general gloom ; he too, traced the withering hand of fate in every intervening ill : his study had been the dreams of the saints, and the chronicles of obscurity ; he had perused the midnight labours of sages, and waded
waded through the voluminous homilies of the ghostly fathers of the church : and when the heavenward light of reason struggled through the haze of fanati¬ cism ; when conviction, and when judg¬ ment, intuitively spoke ; when ought, in opposition to blind faith, arose, to bewilder and to perplex, he chased it, as a snare of* Satan, as a busy toil for the soul. Clad in a sombre vest, and guided by feeling and by habit, Hubert repaired to the oratory of his benefactor, eager to crave his blessing, and to offer up his prayers at the same altar : but no smile greeted his approach; no ready hand was extended in welcome : the oratory was deserted, although the missal lay open, and the consecrated tapers blazed. He would have retreated, but father Gilbert closed up the door-way.—" Pray for thy benefactor," he pronounced; " watch and pray, my son, lest thou too, slide away, and art lost." " Lost ! oh, father !" M 3 " The
" The baron, our most dear friend and brother," pursued the confessor, " is lost, quite lost, to the peace, and to the iovs of this life, I would warn thee in youth, so that thy age be not alike barrei). Hear me, Hubert, and ponder my savings in your heart's core: here, before the altar of the living God ; here, in the awful presence of Jehovah, hear my words, and bosom my counsels." Hubert bent bis knee, and bowed ?> head, ín acquiescence and in homage. ki My calling, blessed be the saints' has led we far away from the vain and false glories of the world; the wrestling of my spirit Ins been light, the pass of my pilgrimage * tnootb, compared to the strifes, and the combats, wiiich beset men, amid temptation, and amid folly. My calling has been the calm haven of the cloister: my calling, has been the daily, the nightly service, of lauding and worshipping tbe Highest: thine, my son, may be a calling more venturous; it
it may lead into the open sea ; it may abound in quicksands and in shoals ; it may wind amid perils, almost too great for human judgment : believe me, life is a slate of trial and probation ; its joys, all shadow; its hopes, all delusion: my¬ riads have quaffed its honeyed cup, and died; myriads have lived, to feel and mourn the emptiness of its promises." " Dear father, what would you of me?" asked Hubert, attentive even to aching interest. " Nought, thou lackest power to grant. Hear me, my son, and treasure deep my counsels. I would warn against the death of hope, against the peace-anni¬ hilating blight of false reliance. Whe¬ ther beset by the sophistry of man, or waylaid by the siren lures of woman, slacken not in the duty of holiness. Let faith be firm; let homage be un¬ erring; let nought of earth obtrude 'twixt thee and heaven. The misery, the repentance, the remorse, which ban- M í quets
quets on the life's-spring of the baron, scattering gall upon his prosperity, and poisoning all his sources of enjoyment, arose in the weakness of indecision. His morn of existence, was, as a cloud¬ less sun, rising in all the glory of ma¬ jesty ; shedding, far and wide, the beams of graciousness ; blessing, invigorating, shining on the thatched roof of depend¬ ance, and joying the care-worn heart: his mind was the seat of virtue: his propensities, and his impulses, nought, to paint with shame the cheek of purity * he was temperate; he was brave; be was fitted to his station ; ardent in the prosperity r of his country ; and devoting his strength and bis powers, to the cause of loyalty. Yet ah, my son ! perfection is not of man : deplorably blind, imbe¬ cile even to a proverb, roan works out his own undoing; be sinks tangled in the snares of his own corrupt and guilty nature ; an apostate from tbe fall, hur¬ rying after the illusive shadows of this world,
world, he finds brambles, where he had pictured only flowers. The baron, in the gloom of midnight, at the grave of departed worth, awe-struck, and insti¬ gated by impulsive feeling, offered up a vow to heaven : it was voluntary ; it was intuitive; it rose from the heart to the lips ; it w r as fashioned, it was uttered, as though by inspiration ; but the glitter¬ ing soul traps of this world, lured him from bis duty, blinded him to bis own hereafter peace : unmindful of bis vow, neglectful of his covenant, vague and minor calls retarding its completion, he sank into ihe tm rice of sense; be .slept, until awakened by the thunder of dread¬ ful retribution» Mighty God ! how dev* jMítk* are thy judgments' bow myste¬ rious thy ordinations* Tbe pure spirit of innocence was the 4 destined expiation; the despoliation of earthly bliss, the medium to lure u stray' soul unto ho¬ liness!" Hubert raised his eyes to the face of M 5 father
father Gilbert, yet could he scarcely see through the tears which blinded them.— ** My benefactor, the bleeding victim of divine wrath ; my benefactor"^—and the sob almost choked articulation—" the hopeless, the despairing author of his own misery/* " Pray for him," urged the confessor; " pray for his acceptance ; pray for his sanctification. Alas ! he stands not alone ; he is one among the myriad, fashioning . out his own wretchedness. Few and light, my son, are the afflictions imposed by Providence : the loss of friends/ the loss of health, almost completes the ca¬ talogue: 'tis the evils entailed by our own wilful passions ; 'tis imprudence, 'tis self-confidence, 'tis false reliance, which, countless and endless as the waves of ocean, swell, and break, and ingulf the peace of our lives." ** Ah, father!" sighed Hubert, "can the lapse of an hour, entail a cognizance wo heavy?** " The
" The lapse of a single moment," eagerly resumed the monk, " may entail a cognizance unto death; nay, after death, unless cleansed, ahd purified, and bleached, through repentance : not for a moment then must the cross be laid down : would we be wise, and virtuous, and pious, we must bear it in our bosoms amid the things of this world ; we must have heaven in view ; we must live, as though our race were nearly run, as though our errand was well nigh accomplished." " And the baron?" asked Hubert, trembling and eager. " The baron," replied father Gilbert, " like a bleeding contrite penitent, re¬ turns to the duty of holiness ; he pros¬ trates himself at the footstool of the Eternal ; he humbles himself in the dust; he owns the nothingness, the insuffi¬ ciency of all things earthly; for he has lived to acknowledge, that there is nothing, more vain, or more frail; than m 6 the
the grandeur and delights of this world," " He has lived," feelingly exclaimed Hubert, " to mourn the overthrow of every joy; to behold the spring of brightest promise, blighted, and stricken, and consigned to the grave." " Yet, as in every dispensation of Divine will, may good be elicited," piously rejoined the confessor. " God chasteneth in mercy, not wrath ; he lureth the runagate back unto holiness ; he purifieth the stray soul, through the awful visitation of his justice." Not once, through the long day, did a smile, or a jest, or ought appertaining to cheerfulness, lighten the morbid gloom of the household : a deep solem¬ nity, a sepulchral stillness, pervaded each corner of the castle : like the last sleep of mortality, like the awful trance of the grave, it impressed every mind ; it quenched the glow of every spirit ; the hours waned in fast and penance; for each alike tracing to Divine wrath, the cloud
cloud hanging over the towers of Hans¬ lape, strove, by forbearance and humi¬ liation, to deprecate all continuance of the dreaded evil. The board was un¬ furnished; the ale unstaved; the buttery untenanted: groans and sighs mingled in each muttered aspiration ; and stripes, and blows, and self-inflictions, spoke the total subjugation of human reason. Hubert, from the summit of tbe war¬ der's tower, watched the slow decline of the setting sun, marked the last burnish trembling in the west, and the flaky clouds of gold and purple, mingling, and fading, and deepening into gloom. It was from the selfsame spot, that he had seen the litter of Isabel borne down the declivity ; that he had stood, until the last moving vestige of the gay re¬ tinue attending De Maudit, was lost in the haze of distance. The remembrance of each distinct period returned ; and with the remembrance of eaeh distinct period, revived anew the pang of part¬ ing:
ing: again he felt the hearts clasp of his youth's companion; and again did memorv thrill with the warm tears of Isabel : he recalled her in all the love¬ liness of childhood ; in all the charms of infant blandishment ; so tender, so guile¬ less, so ductile, so endearing : fair, and pure, and sweet, as modesty's best em¬ blem—the lily, crouching beneath its own umbrage ! He followed her through all the known avocations of piety ; he saw her numbering her beads at the altar of holiness; devout, confiding, supplicating grace and favour on her distant home.—" Dearest Isabel," he murmured, " this day, this fast of St Dunstan, dost thou revise the past ; dost thou aid with thy prayers, our melan¬ choly observances!" As he spoke, his eyes fell upon the grey turrets of the chapel, and an ice-chill stole over his feelings. It lay, bosomed in woods, cow¬ ering amidst gloom and shade—yet did it savour of mortality— for there did the baroness
baroness lay inhumed; and there, had the baron, from the earliest dawn of morning, kept his annual vigil; there, stretched upon tbe monumental slab of the lost partner of his affection, did he mourn the fallacy of all sublunary joy, did he mingle his sighs in every breeze which gathered. Tbe rosy blush, the vermil lip, the dewy eye of beauty, faded from the mind and the heiart of Hubert ; he beheld nought, save the writhing anguish of' bis benefactor ; be recalled nought, save the torture of his bleeding spirit; his groans, his lamenta¬ tions, bis despair ; affection pierced with¬ in tbe hallowed walls of the chapel, and tears, unfeigned and blinding, mingled, as it were, with the tears ofthe mourner : he prayed foi pardon and for peace ; he prayed for some signal blessing, savour¬ ing of accepted atonement " This day —this very fast of St. Dunstan," he fer¬ vently supplicated—Oh, God ! Oh, Fa¬ ther of mercy ! pour down upon the head
head of my benefactor, pour down upon the heart of my benefactor, some token nf ilivint» erraos t" ■VJ* -** * ■ flliV |Ä|AUVV 41 Night, spreading her shadows o'er all things earthly, veiled in misty indis¬ tinctness, α ïlamlets broun, and dim discover'd *-pi c>;'' yet Hubert descended not from the warder's tower; he stood upon the same spot, he leant against the same parapet, from which the hapless heir of Hanslape had been precipitated; he bent over— he forgot the lapse of years—he gazed upon the flinty basement—he fancied the struggle and the death-shriek. His mind, his heart, was full; his shudder almost audible; all of energy, all of hope, all of anticipation, faded : it was forebodance ; it wos regret ; it was wild and shapeless horror, which preyed on every feeling : he marked not the silver stream of moonshine peering amid the foliage ; he marked not the glory of the evening
evening star, brightening as the shadows thickened ; he marked nought, save the despoliation of the baron's earthly com¬ fort; nought, save the perishable hold of all human felicity. The chapel lay before him—the chapel, echoing with the hearts groans of the mourner—the cold, the spirit-breaking mausoleum, in which penance chained the wretched widower of the lady Alice. A light cloud, scudding over the disk of the moon, produced a transient obscurity; the wind too rose above a sigh ; and Hubert, wrapped in moody meditation, read the bluffs and the vicissitudes of man's destiny, in every intervening sha¬ dow: it was as the brief span of human existence, alternately radiated with the bright sunshine of prosperity, or dark¬ ened by the adverse blasts of fate. Suddenly, a footstep, dissipating the trance of thought, awakened him to reality and to wonder; he distinctly heard the low echo; and the next in¬ stant,
stant* a figure, cowering in sable guise, emerged from a grove of oaks and ches- nuts. It advanced—it paused—it took a scrutinizing ken of the building ; and ere again the moon broke through her canopy of mist, gliding back into its hiding-place—like spirits borne on tbe bosom of winds^—it was gone; it was lost; it was veiled from human vision. Hubert clung to the side of the parapet, his forehead sprinkled with death-dews, and every pulse in bis frame throbbing. It was superstition ; it was almost mad¬ dened dread ; it was a mingled rush of doubt and torture which thrilled on every feeling : strongly tainted with the awful fear pervading the whole house¬ hold, be could think of nought save the fast of St Dunstan; he could antici¬ pate nought save ruin and forthcoming dismay : fate seemed to gather in thun¬ der, and the scourge of offended justice, to chase to the utmost verge of lift The approach of old Geoffry recalled him
him to the necessity of exertion : to hint what he had seen, to explain the cause of his agitation, was to spread universal panic and universal horror ; was to con¬ firm every foreboding ill, which for years, had iced the spirits, and cramped the hopes of each inmate of the castle. He heard his summons to the presence of the baron ; he knew, in crossing to the chapel, he must pass the very grove in which he had lost sight ofthe figure : yet though his heart ached with the pang of concealment ; though his native candour spurned the dire necessity, he felt, that the present peace of the whole household w r as at stake.—" I will sub¬ mit all to the judgment of father Gil¬ bert," he mused, " and be guided solely by his counsels." Quick descending from the tower, and wringing in silence the band of the aged Geoffry, Hubert, alone and lonely, crossed the court-yard, and by a back postern, entered the park. It was, as the hour of fate, as the die of
of o'erwhelming destiny: a few brief moments, and his own sad story would be revealed ; his hold on the humanity of the baron ; his first admission beneath the roof of Hanslape. Every minor consideration faded in the anticipation ; even the mysterious figure was forgotten in his near approach to the chapel : perhaps he might trace the dear ties of consanguinity; perhaps he might reap the rich harvest of a parents love : again his spirit rallied, and borrowing the colour of local feeling, thrilled with something like hope. No step, no in¬ tervening shadow, crossed his pathway ; no sound, no sign of animation, u Save «ht;» the v. unì sighed» and the « nhnç <»vA Seream'd -uiitary to the muumtul moon"— the bladed grass teemed with the night- dews, and many a wavy wreath of mist, white and light, as winter's hoar-frost, inwrapped May's blossoms. A faint light, streaming through the casement
casement of the chapel, deepened sur¬ rounding gloom ; yet Hubert, eager and anxious, plunged into the imbosoming grove, of " _.-----—— ?????-? and bay, Funereal pensive birch, And shivering aspens." He pushed open the door ; he stood in tbe nave of tbe chapel ; be saw, through the dim light of the tapers burning be¬ fore the high altar, the baron, wrapped in haircloth, and prostrate on tbe flinty pavement; be beard his sighs and bis lamentations, and bis own heart, and his own eyes, flowed in commiseration and sympathy.—" Could tbe Almighty will a penance so humiliating? could religion enjoin a debasement so entire?" Hubert .^mothered the dangerous query : how could he believe it other than right, when precept, when ensample, taught him, that privation, endurance, and mor¬ tification, were tbe surest passes to heaven; that the torture of the flesh, was
was the sanctifier of the spirit ; that the writhings of corporeal sufferance, was expiation for committed trespass? He advanced with a soundless step ; he ap¬ proached the low tracery, inclosing the monument of the baroness; he beheld her sculptured effigy, breaking the bonds of the tomb, escaping to the realms of bliss, and bearing the cherub Henry in her bosom ; he bent his knee ; he bowed his head, in humbleness of spirit, in meek token of imperfection and of error : his heart, not his lips, aspirated a prayer; his sob, not his tears, aroused the almost dormant intellect of his benefactor. " Hubert," pronounced the baron, in accents, broken and low, " behold in me, the insufficiency of splendour, the irreversible, the overwhelming penalty of guilt ; behold in me, a crying lesson of human frailty, and just and awful reprisal ; in me, the veriest worm bur¬ dening the earth, a sure, an incontestible proof, that crime has its season; that conscience,
conscience, not totally dead, awakens to dreadful cognizance." Hubert could not speak ; to urge ought of consolation, ought of self-ex¬ ertion, was to argue against the tenets of his creed ; was to yield to reason, a sway, which fanaticism would not au¬ thorize. The baron half raised himself, and reclining his head against the tomb of the departed Alice, stretched forth his hand; it was damp and cold; it shook in nervous debility ; yet it clasped tbe warmer palm of his sorrowing com¬ panion, with a clasp of momentary energy.—" Hubert, Hubert," he pur¬ sued, " the ordinances of God are irre¬ versible: for a season, aye, for a little season, the illusive sun of this world, may dazzle, may beset the judgment, and seduce the heart; it is but for a season : the mouth of the prophet speak- etb : ' ye sliall remember your ways, and all your doings, wherein ye have been defiled; and ye shall loathe your¬ selves,
selves, in your own sight, for all your evils that ye have committed.' Oh, God ! holy, mighty, and eternal ! the time is come, the warning is accom¬ plished. I do loathe myself—I do faint —I do sicken, beneath the grievous burden of my own crimes. Here, pros¬ trate upon the dust of her who was the sweetener of life's bitter pilgrimage;— here, do I confess my punishment just; do I confes., the waning hours of a pro¬ tracted existence—should Heaven grant me favour—devoted to shrift, to prayer, and to penance, to be an insufficient expiation, for the known turpitude of negligence and indecision, in the high duty of holiness." The baron paused, and Hubert uttered something of the imperfection of man, of the imperfection of human felicity, of the imperfection of all things, save God ! But Hanslape, relentless and stern to himself alone, suffered nought of palliative to beguile hira into softness.— "No,
" No, no," he exclaimed, " like the stiff- necked Egyptians, I muffled my eyes to Conviction ; I hardened wy heart to truth ; I have dared the threat ; I must pay the forfeit Listen to me, Hubert. 'Tis the season set apart for humility and self-abasement ; 'tis the day, nay, almost the hour, when the awful mes¬ senger of fate warned me of the wrath to come;—'tis the fast of St. Dunstan; 'tis——" Hubert started; he heard a sound, and he glanced around the chapel in breathless expectancy. " Nought, save the wind," pursued the baron ; it sighs through the aisles; it mourns in sympathy with my affliction : no hunian eye beholds us; no human ear, save thine, is open to my plaint Attend to me, my son: to rend anew the wounds of memory, becomes a part of my penance*" And then, with many a pause, and in many a broken and dis¬ jointed sentence, he succinctly unra¬ velled the eventful woof of his destiny ; vol. ι. n the
the early fall of his gallant father; the self-sacrifice of his pious mother: the death and burial of the earl-marshal, led to the Temple church ; every nerve was shaken; every feature convulsed: he spoke of his lowly vigil, as a voluntary offering to holiness; he spoke of the visitation of the Knight-Templar, as a messenger, wielding the thunder of Om¬ nipotence. " Vows to heaven, savour not of the vows of this world I he solemnly pro¬ nounced. 'Twas the sentence, the com¬ prehensive sentence, which rooting me to the marble pavement, turned my blood to ice; it was said in the gloom of midnight, amid the ashes of the dead, beneath a roof, as sacral, as impressive, as ever human hands reared up an offer¬ ing to holiness : and yet protraction was my bane; love, hope, terrestrial bliss, the shoals of my undoing." The wild horror, the creeping chill of awe and of dread, shot from bosom to bosom. Hu¬ berts
berts hands were clasped ; Hubert's eyes were rivetted on the wan face of his benefactor; he spoke not; and the in¬ tensity ofhis interest, converted the very beatings of his heart, the very throb- bings of his temples, into sound :—and not when Hanslape reached the storm, which overtook him in his pilgrimage to Walsingham ; not when, piercing the copse-wood, and humbling himself at the foot of the cross, he received from the mysterious stranger, the charge so precious to his feelings, did he lend a more attentive, a more agonized interest The baron ceased, and Hubert con¬ tinued on his knees beside him—praying with him, praying for him : his prayers were the fervent aspirations of the spirit, for no sound passed his lips ; were the pious invocations of a wrapt soul, at¬ tuned to worship ; of a mind, as pure, and as sanctified, as ought appertaining to mortal infirmity. " The task is accomplished," said the N 2 baron ;
baron ; ** the pemnöe h achieved : you know the dire negligence which has entailed a reprisal so heavy; you know the extent of my early trespass—you know the mystery of vour own fate.*' * #r tf Hubert snatched tbe hand of his be¬ nefactor, his gratitude, his sensibility, choking his voice, and flooding his eyes, " My fnend—my more than father Γ he sobbed out—" blessed guide of my prin¬ ciples and my hopes ! worthy—worthy a brighter destiny. Ah ! when I forget the weight of my obligation, may the wrath of offended Heaven crush me!" And then be reverted to the copse- wood, and questioned, again and again, of the stranger, of his height, of his accent, of his every w r ord : but suppo¬ sition and conjecture served but to thicken the misty shroud wiiich close enveloped him: Hanslape could yield no solution, and the colour of his fortune remained obscured, " Tarry a fitter season,'* said the baron, anxious
anxious to curb the eagerness of e«n- quiry : " the fast of St Dunstan be ever devoted to penance and to meditation : tempt me not, my son, from my self- prescribed rule of duty. Vows to heaven, savour not of the vows of this world ! It was the warning aphorism of the Knight-Templar—and be it ever im¬ pressed on your mind^—be it stamped irreversibly on your inmost soul." Hubert breathed a shuddering sigh : the solemnity of the hour; the sepul¬ chral gloom enveloping each corner of the chapel ; the stilly silence of death ; the shrines, and the monumental tablets, half seen, through the flickering light of the tapers, deepened the wrapt awe, the holy dread, stealing over his spirits : a thousand torturing feelings warred with¬ in him: his own isolation; above all, the festering cares of his benefactor; cares, defying the ameliorating balm of time ; cares, pungent and deadly, viewed N 8 through
through the stagnant darkening medium of superstition. Hanslape raised his heavy eyes to the ftee of his young companion,—" Since the death of my Alice," he pronounced, ** eaeh fast of St Dunstan, have I passed in wailing and in woe: here, in this chapel, at the footstool of holiness— here, have I supplicated grace and fa¬ vour: but alas! my vigils have been unblessed, my prayers unaccepted. I have watched, until the garish sun has quenched the bright blaze of the tapers ; until all of gloom has vanished; and yet no Templar has appeared. If a spirit, n and he spoke with solemnity and fervour, *' why token not of ap¬ peasement and peace ?" u No, not a spirit, surely not a spirit," eagerly exclaimed Hubert ; ** rather was it the prophetic counsel of breathing virtue, than ought of preternatural fore- bodence" ** And yet," resumed the baron, " he hides
hides* himself from me; he eludes all search, all enquiry. I have sought him in the Temple church—I have claimed him at the hands of the prior of his own order. If in life, why r evade scrutiny? —why withhold explanation ? I would woo it on my knees—I would crave it, as necessary to peace and to health." " The hour may come," said Hubert, and then be paused, and sprung erect upon his feet ; for he heard a rustling sound, and he saw one of the banners, sweeping like a sepulchral pall from the carved roof of the chapel, wave to and fro with unusual motion. %i What bodes it?" questioned Hans¬ lape, catching the arm of the youth : but Hubert broke from the trammel; for at the instant, a figure, or the shadow of a figure, glided athwart the aisle, and disappeared through the door of en¬ trance. " Stay me not—stay me not," he im¬ plored, struggling and eager. " I will follow,
follow, though it lead to death;" and shaking off the feeble hold of the awe¬ struck baron, with one bound he rushed from the chapel.
NOTES.
