Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Treachery: or, The grave of Antoinette: a romance, interspersed with poetry
TREACHERY.
CHAP. L Our t*nrs are fur the dead ; Our sighs for her uho has j-a^scd av>'3\*. OasiA>, I ALWAYS thought a simiìittlde so striking could not result from chance," Tsaid the dame, gazing on the pale face which still reel Lied on her shoulder. " Oh no, no! it was your own mother who died in this cottage ! it was you whom the monk so cruelly spirited from my care !" "What monk?" fearfully questioned Gabrielle; " teil me—direct me where that monk is to be found; for surely, if he be of human mould, he will appease vol. in. в my
my doubts, he will yield to my supplica¬ tions." " Tlie monk has never darkened the threshold of this dwelling since the me¬ morable night in which he bore you hence," replied the dame. " Perhaps he shrunk from my reproaches, or rather, might he not fear inquiries he darcu ¿ιοί resolve ?" %i Dared not !" repeated the doubting Gabrielle. " May Heaven pardon me if î bcìy its script !" resumed the dame ; tç but much 1 suspect, he was no friend to the poor lady· Tis true, he pra) ed by the dead body; but his prayers seemed more the resiilťof custom than of feeling. Monks are not all saints; and surely hypocrby acts as a blackening die to every other sin·" She paused for an answer, but Gabri¬ elle continued silent ; her heart beat high, her whole thoughts were absorbed by the sorrows of the stranger; one mo¬ ment
ment a ray of joy danced in her eyes, the next saw them bent to the earth in desponding doubt—" My mother f" she murmured ; " oh no, no—deceitful hope, she could not be my mother. Un¬ known, unsought, blessed, thrice blessed should I be, could I kneel upon that grave—-could I claim it as a mother's resting-place!" " And yet you have a mother," said her hostess, with a look almost amount¬ ing to reproach. Gabrielle burst into tears. ît was the thread of her secret woes—the sensitive chord of unguessed-at misery, fC There h some strange mystery yet," pursued the dame, vainly striving to ap¬ pease her grief. 4i You may kneel upon that grave, you may claim it as a mo¬ ther's resting-place: formy life would I tax you are the selfsame baby who once nestled in my arms/' Gabrielle wished, yet dared not credit the assertion ; her feelings yearned to- ß 2 wards
wards the stranger, yet conviction whis¬ pered—a mother stiH survives, *' Methinks you are strangely incredu¬ lous/* observed the dame; 4ť yet may not the same cause which so fraudulent¬ ly removed you from my care, colour theseere* designs of a nominated mother? may not the monk, an active emissary, have consigned you to a being politic and void of feeling as himself?" Gabrielle started ; she clasped her hands in wild joy—** Yes, yes, 'iL pos¬ sible !" she exclaimed ; and then, in the eagerness of hope, she petitioned the pe¬ rusal of ihe paper which had lain hid in the stranger's bosom. *' Alas! it contains no elucidation to the mystery,*' said her hostess, " though it bespeaks the reign of persecution and horror. Poor mourner ! forcibly does it mark her the victim of lawless, of relent- leys coercion : but who was her tyrant, and why his enmity became excited, the hand of Heaven can alone resolve. To the
the latest moment of strength, she raved of the malignancy of sin—she shrunk as though from the grasp of some perse¬ cuting fiend ; and then beseeching me to hide her— ( 1 have seen so much mise¬ ry in the world,' she would exclaim^ * fain would I fly it ! so much treachery—* so much ingratitude—such black, black hearts, with such fair, fair faces! Oh me !' and she crossed her hands upon her bosom, and she looked up to heaven with n n expression I shall never forget, * man is the only being not to be resolved V — she was young, very young to have form¬ ed such a conclusion," pursued the dame; Sl but experience may be gleaned without the purchase of years, and the chilling frost of misfortune oft nips the brightest buds of promise !" She opened the packet, she took from it the little heart ; it was a ruby of bright¬ est lustre, incased in pure gold, upon which was inscribed the name of Sŕ. Sau- reme. The same ribbon which had sus· в 3 pended
pended ît round the neck of the stran¬ ger remained—the same knot which her fingers had woven: the reflection was melancholv ; the eves of Gabrielle were filled with tears. tť My poor Louis has often wept at sight of this little bauble,"said the dame; ** often, very often has he listened to the story, and asked a thousand questions about her height, her form, her features. When he returns, I will point io you, and solve at once his inquiries." Gabrielle sighed ; she took the papers ; the envelope was a Yittle poem, in the handwriting of Louis, But though her leyes rested on the superscription, rested on ihe strangeťs grave* her feelings were too interested to be caught by the flow of poesy ; she shrunk even from the glance of observation, and retiring to her own chamber, unfolded the rough trans¬ cript of heartfelt woe :—
ľ íl JO MEAT.
FRAGMENT. (f Am I indeed mad ? or do tbey only- call me so ? Mad ! no, no! madness-is loss of thought—loss if reflection-—loss of memory. The past is before me—the present is dark, threatening— *-thè fyture swims upon a sea of blood. 'Tfs true, my temples are bound as'tbougb'by a fillet ; 'tis true, my heart feels swelled, as though too big for my bosom ; and my glazed and burning eyes drop not one single tear : yet they need not fear me ; my start is despair, not madness—my shriek agony, not the frenzy of atı unset¬ tled brain î — — — — — — (t Why have they brought me here ? why have they banished m«* to such a pri¬ son ? why am I watched by a fiend in woman's shape? Is it fo triumph in my misery? or is it, God! aïLseeîncr God î is it to murder my babe ? — — — " Beauty is a sad snare ; beauty oft be- B Ί guilu
guiles to ruin : I know it tempts the spoiler, and I know human nature is weak. But beauty, no, nor credulity, has been the quicksands to me ! — — —- ~ 4ţ Another day dawns ; and the hea¬ vens, the forest, and the towering clini», are âli I can descry. Alas ! what a fear¬ ful change does memory record ! 1, who was once so happy^—I, who was once so blest— Í, who knew misfortune but by name, and sorrow but by fancy, what am I now ? a prisoner, an isolated, wretch¬ ed öeing, whom fate and man alike con¬ spire to crush ! I cannot die, neither can I cheat mv ¡ailer. If I could only reach the boundary of yon forest, hope and liberty would redawn ; if 1 could fly from this wretched, wretched dwelling ; ¡f ------ £ \las î whither am I hurrying ? 'tis true I am not mad, but my brain к strangely perturbed — — — — ** Nature's inevitable hour is not yet come ;
come; my babe will not yet see the КцЫ, nor 1 escape from suiTerance. Monger! woman: fiend', long weeks of sorrow must intervene ere you murder my hapless cherub. Murder! avenging (ìod ! mav yelî> of blank despair haunt ail vour coming hours î mav sou be par· doner! in another worid ! in f his, may restless misery, mav corroding езге be* come your portion ' -— —- —- — ' f I would write for mv child— i would fain pen my miseries; but how revert to scenes of happiness ? huw linger o'er the hours of departed blis^ ? how tell the tale of promised joy ? how paint the blasting dawn of treachery ? My child, mv nnborn cherub ! von whom nature stamps unseen a candidate for tenderness —if your innocence should disarm the murderer's rage-—if you should e*er at¬ tain the years of reason, be warnecL be cautioned by a mother's fate; let her ex- amnie i/mk deep into уоцг heart; let и j her
lier woes art a^ a bcicon fo wnrn \y against the shoals which have v»etked her aniel î Aias. ^il m\ vvecs \:c гтлет bered ? v%îll this li .t weak effort bc pie- served? î \s i i r e as thouíih mv babe wcm· safe from persecution ; 1 f.v^ef. í! at sur¬ rounded on every bid*· bv l iîter, by per¬ severing enmitv, wc nvi^t both, bofa creep into the gnve for s'.e!:^". i-'r. Sauverne, once, ever sm belov«\l, v\Í»v are vou not here to defend, to v.ndk.ito the fame of her you have ^^vч^^гà ' ** r . Sauverne, all-seeing Heaven ! can i!e brln^ who inveigled me hither, who, ъч ri f der the false show of mercy, lured me ir· ihe toil—can that being have spared St. Sauverne ? — — -— — — -— " Last night I wept myself to sleep, and лег í dreamt that my prison doors were opened ; J dreamt of joy, joy, that most transient, that most raptu¬ rous of all 'emotions—joy, which came like the vision- oì light to a bund man,
man. who wakes but to find himself hhli in daikne^ ; for î а^аке — î find the (heating deb:s'c>n í ! c r !— í find mvself in the selfsame prison, watched b\ the seíf- sa· ie ivii 1er í -— — ·—■ — — —- <% lee чт gi'iK the mountain's top — crei f io;/* face is lov elv; I see ii> rays pierce the fiïrthc4 limits — í see it dap- j/e the rocky Heeps— Ì see it tinge the vi i·/ 1 - vliu ;bv. 1; »»lows alike upon hap- γ ■ ivï,—- ι.·;,"·:ι misály; it beami abko wit: :< ti-e ! !^î ti chamber—upon th'j hı¬ nçlı al K'îcr. N.ftjre is indiscriminately bT'Hìi^·./ ; "/ş the lunnr.n Leart which es- t., ü4ı /ie fa*, o jr ; one day we hail her g.l'îs \v>h a i'iiile —the next the spirit i...,x'ps be\oud her powers to resuscitate. I am not u'iiirairiul, vet I cannot bless t u c return <л mor*. ing ; nhiht is more, far n-»re Cv.ii^enial ; 1 woo its gloom, as 1 \>ou;J the dtep shadow of the grave f'V t'.»fîcned beams of the moon are d;i- H 6 cordant;
cordant; it ıs darkness, ebon darkness which suits my feelings. I listen to the loud blast of the tempest—to that ele¬ mental strife from which, in happier djys, I have shrunk dismayed, I close not mv eyes against the lightning's flash— í see it oierce my chamber·— í hear the din- ning thunder's roar—nay, when 1 feel my bed rock, as a cradle, in the storm, I smile as though it sympathized in the moans of my despair ί —■ — — — " How many davs, how manv weeks have worn away ! 'Three whole months, and I know not the name of my perse¬ cutor. Time tarries not even in sufîer¬ ance; it pursues the same course—it is measured by the same moments; but those moments, blessed saints, how are they leadened, protracted, lengthened beyond whole years of joy ! — — — " St. Sauverne a villain ! oh no, no î Tell
Tell me that Heaven has ceased fo be merciful, and 1 will believe you : — — ťí I scarce know what ï write. This fiend, this woman tortures, perplexes, al¬ most madden^ me ! St. Sauverne cap¬ able of treachery—St. Sauverne fo de¬ ceive, to desert me—peace, vile de- famer ! first tell me honour is a chimera. virtue but an empty shade ! — — — i( How strangely versatile are the crea¬ tures of this world ! their forms, their features alike— their minds, their heart* ьо opposite. Once, judging from my own confined knowledge, 1 thought there О' О was no guile in man ; í thought every human being virtuous, and every virtu¬ ous being happy. Alas! I dreamt not of a place so desolate as this dwelling, of a band so lawless as its inmates." — —. The paper trembled in the hand of Gabrielle.
Gabrielle. Could there be two dwell¬ ings so similar ? could there be two be¬ ings so accursed ? Her eyes sought the perusal, even whilst her heart sickened in expectancy. " î gaze from the window— í behold the vast bulwark of creation—mountains towering to the skies-— giant cliffs, green with eternal verdure! nature, nature лП; nought of art, save yon turrertcd watch- tower, tottering o'er the steep !" — — The paper dropped upon the floor, whilst Gabrielle, ) leiding to the impul¬ sive thrill of her fee! ir ; s, burst into an n*ronv which for a time mocked the trite a r g u m e n t s of reaso n . íl There cannot be two such spots ľ* she exclaimed ; et there cannot be two such occu páticas ! The ridge of moun¬ tains—-the emerald cliffs—the tax of in a- chery—*
^•f '.V— *Ьс diend of murder-*'».nd then the wat( h-fov.cr—mother of God ! there needed not that watch-tower to compiete the similitude. J> ϊί was long, very long, e * r> she cou IJ calm the hysterie swell of her bosom- ore she could cecal her scattered thoughts —ere she coniti return to the important paper. Wild and disjointed hopes fan¬ ned imagination—vi\id, sanguine antici¬ pa f Ions fi u í tered at her hea -t ; vet did she fear to yield to the latitude of f.r.cy—yet did she tremble lest the chill cold blank of disappointment should re- dr.wn. and, with a mind tortured bv its own incongruous ideas, she snatched the luvstie fragment, as though to brave the ι/ J ' V? warbt.
(t God of compassion and mercy î how have I arraigned thy dispensations í how ha\e I murmured at my lot ! ï have thought myself neglected, disregarded ; 1 had
I had forgotten that thou art just and gracious to all thy creatures. This night, this very night the effort to escape must be made ; this night, or my cars have mistaken the whispers of caution, the postern gate will be left unbarred. Some new enterprise allures, and nought, save the watchful sibyl, remains in the fast¬ ness. Should sleep steal upon lier sen¬ ses, should zeal relax, I will creep from my chnr.iber; noiseless as death, I will íly, I w ill braveeverv unknown horror, to escape thfc known thraldom. What is the gloom which hope will not lighten ? what the efîbrt which despair will not make ? î heed not darkness, nor rain, nor wind, nor all the elements can wage against me. Tis man alone I fear—all else is harmless. The earth will yield me a resting-place; the heavens will be my canopy ; yes, in the deepest den will I creep to escape the shadow of a fellow-being ; instinct may annihilate, but practised cruelty is worse than instinct. To-night—holy Heaven, shield
shield me in the enterprise ! direct me, sustain me, guard me ! without thy aid all human projects fail ; upheld by thy favour, the seeming flights of despera¬ tion are crowned with the surety of suc¬ cess ! In ignorance, in blindness, I go, I seek the harbour of fiaternal friendship ; be Thou my pilot and my guide ! — ~ ft The hour is not yet arrived, and al¬ ready does my hand tremble. í shvnk within the solitude of my chamber, lest anxiety should excite suspicion. The day declines—the gloomy tints of the heavens deepen ; little does she suspect the project ripening in my brain; weak from disease and misery, she dreams not that courage and resolution lingers. Fool, fuol ! she knows not what the soul dare brave in search of freedom ; penned up in sufferance, the faintest gleam of op¬ portunity arouses all its vigours. St. Sauverne, husband of my heart's idola¬ try ! lis thou who art the spur to action ! 'tis
'tis thy loved form which, spite of sexual weakness, nerves me to hardihood and toil. St. Sauverne, worshipped St. Sau¬ verne ! should the moment of re-union return, policy shall no more infringe up¬ on our bliss, caution shall no more banish us each other. No; I will proclaim th\ sacred claim to affection—I will tax the fervour of a brother's love ! St. Sau¬ verne, this night, alone, unaided, un¬ friended, do ï brave the wilderness, do I fly from these mountains. Oh, cherish me in the sanctuary of your bosom, be your faith the harbour of my reliance ! The time advances—the season for action is nigh— ï have watched them from ihe ruin—three, four, five, armed and care¬ fully disguised: not one remaining—they have passed the watch-tower—they have descended the mountain—yet must I tar¬ ry till forgetfulness steeps the senses of my jailer. Hasten then, oh sleep î bland, auspicious sleep í for I would bribe thee with a year of wakefulness î Panting, breathless,
breathless, I wouid fly, I would abjure the cold rule of policy. r ihe reward! blessed saints, give me patience, rein in the perturbation of my feelings, г űl them into something like caution !" Gabrielle sighed af the close of the fragment; she read it a;ain and again; her heart ached for the fugitive, Twas evident she had cscaocd from her orison —she had wandered in search of the ha¬ ven of connubial bliss—she had wander¬ ed but to die. tf Poor mourner I" she apostrophized ; " victim of persecution and woe !" and then she examined the ruby hear! ; ond then, with feelings she v 'inly sought to decipher, did she press it to her lips. In vain she tried to un¬ ravel the mysterious web. The stranger had fled alone from the ruin, yet was she supported to the cottage by one clad in the sacred vesture of religion—by one whose actions could not have been the result
result of compassion·—one who ль ι ha\e been deep read in the story, or why ha\e listened to the recital of her stifør¬ ings with such chilling apathy ? why have .spirited away her hapless babe ? Gabri¬ elle wept, yet she could not solve the riddle. The more she re flee ted, the more was she bewildered ,* she pined to substantiate the declaration of her hos¬ tess, }et 'twas possible for nature's spor¬ tive hand fo impress two similar marks; it was more than possible for the heated imagery of the brain to magnify a mere similarity of complexion into likeness— ,s If her own son, if her own Louis bears a resemblance to the stranger, why may not the outline extend to another? Louis too feels the same interest/' mused the incredulous girl, unfolding the lines he had penned, " or why, when at home, does he tend the grave with such re¬ ligious care ? why does he behold this little heart but to imbrue it in his tears ? why does he propose a thousand questions ?
questions? why docs he listen with un¬ dying interest to the oft-told tale of sor- row ? No, no, my two sanguine friend, 'tis compassion, that native principle of our being, which alike leads your Louis and mvself to the still, cold sanctuary of misfortune !"
{ ' P.!U«o, tiAv'ier, jraibr ! nur u'er this grouMÌ« V\ ith ÌOi>St? r unh«tiiow*d t road invade , Χ'-'ςτ pbu-k the ilowers «hich cluster mund A t*rang<4'4 L"".iv»· K.jf <·'λγ this cvpre^s niiy btreu', VVhjse sombre tops the iJii;ht-br*-4 7e wave. Or bru^h u\\ay the morning dew, From tins lune grai**» Though s.id, unniurk'd—thougii drear, forlorn- No marble bust a name doth have , £till ¿"Vmpathy, of heaven bom. \\ eep- (i'er this grave.
For
Гог w 'hat is pomp, or \vl»at is. рал'г, The baast t-í birth, the mec J of praise, The pageants of a gilded hour, V\ tl п. tl.c : Wtll tby tl.f dai* >C ,it»th -'i ^ rui 5 4\ III tficv Γι )in pam »Л» 4 -«/.»*, ťiť blavt CH4ad m 11 unic r. м-л у: v\ i ti.i . с' μγϊ ■k ť Will ihev life's lbtti/2 hear proïr..U ; Wilí they the tho 1 n tidm ¡г.спЛу га^е ? Wiii they enture one mui hent iset Tti с 1 ti ! "e tr Ah lo '. í r ¡r ¿- ¡nus, Hvhe«, povsV, 'Vou.h, teául; , íi.nuüíit e, сини î -.ле; AU drOüY— í;d, ttii, ,U s/ili i-huSt hot , bc* ш t u 1 Tread izlitij thťh on thi- irrer n mo .iad, W heie vviaur ьКл -íľs pnynCsti bra\e ; Where eair.ebt 5по*л drops rv; y he four* i,
ν , Vv, V^ İıt tí Oì.« .4 ï ш ah î u Κ,ηπ uf ľ\ I ij> w lucii ΐ he oîuvü ч . Γ) tb w hu h tlie { enni ne Yt f, wh, Л ib beauty? what ís , (an they the heart from mis í , Сап they arrtjfet oue mourutut t ? Οι ť ur life is al! a gilded tov ; Vam the by ht cumas which y Vain ali ihe рюш'э'Ц hopes of , - 1*ы!гг, tnn'itr, р*шье! ai., s Л ııd ali hf(V uiîchif Brave the ¡¡ün h:re& ' «, ч w _y
VjÍltVl . Jà» ?ί', ί>:.·1* г Г.чг píHťncf Л Γι jt riil i y tu.;-, à 4 i nrt.-i'Iiiv'ıî \scr»İ5 t-f ¡ii muf ("u.irtc-·;., t- i**··] vith repkou? uo*· uìipJair-ible, Ь ί*.: <1 İt ira mt>> tbt- unsutptcting Umt, ЛпЛ hu'^Vi /fu/d ы to ms« rt s. !.π ,κ ^ V¡c;nr after night did (he companion ν ч lister Mathilde tend the joyless courh <>, the fever-scorched father Eustache; njght :ifter night did she minister to his wants and îïooth his ravinirs— did she luimour «*11 the flights of delirious fane)— did ^he- talk to him of Hortense as though tlie lapse of vears was expunge«! ; and not till rcturnifUi sanity restored the calm rci'Mì of rt^iíination— -not till enabled once more f о re un η f о h К un v ar \ ing du- ť.e..
tics, did she steal one single hour for re¬ pose, one single thought for recreation. Then bending at the altar of her wor* ship, she pourcJ out the homage of a grateful heart ; then, southed, repaid by the internal balm of self-approval, did she seek *he society of Согка :к1е. it was after the vesper service, that, repairing to the little chamber, endeared 4S being once tenanted bv the friend of her youth, the sister Mathilde, to the so licitations of her attentive companion, lesumed the thread of a narrative so laic 'y and so abruptly severed. ťí The second enclosed letter," sait! the mm, ' f was indeed a transcript of tb rt heart—was for Hortense —was from Eve raid. I stole to this very chamber— ï carefully closed the door— î crepi to the couch of my friend—nay, I hesitated not to break the slumber of forgetfulness. Sweet was her smile, vivid was her blush, *hcn she traced the well known charac VOL ill, С ţe; ,
ters of her lover, when she read undying affection, persevering hope !" Sister Mathilde paused; she unfolded a small packet of letters—she put them into the hands of Corisande— €i When your mother quitted St. Honorée, to my charge was this packet committed," she observed. " ît was for her own security that she parted with her treasure—a trea¬ sure which I was to have resigned when ------" her lip quivered—a tear trembled in her eye—she struggled with her emotions—she dashed away the truant testament of weakness, as with an inward sob she concluded—" your mothe' never claimed them, and with me, in this solitude, have they been hid.*' The nun drew her dark veil over her features-—she folded her arms upon her bosom—she sat in melancholy abstrac¬ tion, as Corisande, drawing nearer the ta* per, perused the following letters :— —»_ « The
(t The die of absence is as the pang of death— Hortense, angel of my never slumbering fancy, is İt for me that you are banished the charm of society ? is it for me that you are condemned the inmate of a religious cell ? Mistaken fa¬ ther ! not even this stretch of arbitrary power can ava-il, for where ехЫз the hardship which love braves not ? where the danger wfoich love does not conquer? í have followed, I will follow—seas nor realms shall bar my passage ! Hortense, recai the past ; recaí the interest you have owned, and wonder not at my bold¬ ness ! Within sight of your prison do i sojourn; amidst surrounding rocks, a- midst mountain forests, do I shrink from the possibility of recognition, my heart owning but one impulse, my eyes seek¬ ing hut one direction. Write to me, my Hortense; fear not, for friendship has bribed even the sibyl at the gate. Tel! me you are a willing slave, and 1 submit с 'Ì to
to my destiny ; tell me that the hours cf past transport are remembered, and love will point out a path to freedom ,f '
f ' You are not happy, you are liot even content. Oh, no, no; how can you be happy, how can you be content in this hateful separation ? Hortense, the acceptation of the heart has given us to each other. You remember the pa^e^—- you remember the thrill of fust-awaken- ed passion—you remember even our meeting in the church of îl Sepolcro * blessed meeting î not the rapid light* Hing's flash can be more electric than the st nation that meeting conveyed. It was no delusion ; you lived in my brain, you mingled with the vitality of my be¬ ing ; you coloured every scene of life, you gave the future to bliss or to disap¬ pointment ! Tell me, Hortense, must it le
be bliss or must it be disappointment ? Dare you brave impending danger ? dare vou become my own ?" *· Sweet coward ! dear, sensi« t!'c, trembling Hortense ! like the timid nestling, vou wish, vet dread the flight. Fear not, my tender- love; the arm of persevering friendship aids the enter¬ prise : de Roussillon becomes the sheet- ant hor of our hopes—»Heaven will bless him ! our sister, our Mathilde w di reward him, will be the sunshine to his future days—for what are the possessions of the universe, if the heart be dead to love ? Tell our Mathilde the hours of endurance will be shot t ; whisper in her car that de Roussillon will soon present himself at the grate—will soon claim, at her hands, the blushing recompence of his hopes; he too will be the mediator, he will soften, he will appease the angry с 3 passions
passions of the marquis de Hautenvilîe, he will reinstate us in favour, he will re¬ store us aH to peace. Be courageous, then, my own Hortense ; for once act the heroine-—only once, and henceforth be my arms your natural harbour P*
" Fortune favours the enter¬ prise, Heaven smiles on the undertaking! To-morrow night, my Hortense, when the eyes of watchfulness are closed, submit yourself to the guidance of Drusiile ; at¬ tend to her cautions, rely implicitly on her directions ; she will be the pilot to bliss, she will conduct you beyond your prison's boundary, she will be the com¬ panion of your flight she will witness the bond of wedded faith. Fear not though the chapel be dark ; the priest will await, the arm of love will be your sup¬ port. To-morrow night, my beloved Hor¬ tense V' —*- i, T j lus
rt Thus betrothed, how could my mo¬ ther become the wife of my father ?" thought Corisande, as she folded the letters, as she restored them to the nun ; but though her lips ventured no sound, her eyes were fixed in anxious expectan¬ cy upon her companion. The saddened expression of thought had fled—her fea¬ tures had yielded to the struggling com¬ bination of horror, contempt, and pity-*- an hysteric sob swelled her bosom—a scalding tear trickled down her cheek. Corisande would have taken her hand, but she drew it hastily away ; and as she pressed it to her burning forehead, as she breathed a shuddering sigh—" 'Tis strange," she observed, ** that the reca¬ pitulation of woes, which time has fami« ïiarized, should overthrow the decisions of reason, should counteract the sway of resignation. Holy Heaven f when I re¬ vise the trials of my youth, when I re¬ trace the period in which these letters с 4 were
were penned, I almost forget the injunc¬ tion of iorgi\eness, as we hope to be for¬ given ! How deceptive were appear¬ ances, how buoyant my hopes, when Ì first perused these lasting testaments of confiding love, these convicting memo¬ rials of outraged iriendship, when 1 fell into the wily snare, when I became an unconscious actor in the insidious drama ! " The night arrived; it was dark, İt was \,mpestuoas ; rçqt a star twinkled in the heavens ; the wind moaned hollow through the cloisters; the cataract, wol¬ len and loud, roared üke the dm of thunder. Deep was the sadness whivh stole upon my spirits; in \ain I strug¬ gled with my feelings, I joined in the psalmody of the siste rs, »but my eyes were tixea upon Hortense. She knch in the chapel; fervently, most t fervently, d«d she aspirate «the prayers for grace ; yet her cheeks werç colourless, and her fea- turcs
tn res almo r ^ co »uhi bed Slie ¡/.runk fro'n the s^'utinv of ihe nurs sir clinic to mv arm - -*he iui*r ; <-d »hrough th^ clo»s- ters—-and w^cn she reached her own apar« mení, she th?*evv' her arms around mv net k, she buried hei five in my bo¬ so ni, and wet) í as though in sad presen¬ timent of evil. In vain 1 called her by the endearing пзп e of ьЫег ; in vain I spoke oi the anxious, the happy Everard; she could only answer by a sob, she could only acknowledge acquiescence by a closer, b s a dearer embrace. At length restored ίο something like composure, the hour of expectancv was ]iã>sed in arrangements for the future— in sanguine, in deceptive anticipation. The bride of Everard, rich in the sued-for pardon of her father, was to remove me from St, Honorée, was to bestow me on-------.·· the nun turned aside her face for a moment ; she paused, then, in an inward faltering tone, articulated—" de lïoussillüH ľ' с 5 " Pt,or
tf Poor sister Mathilde !" murmured Corisande. * f No, no, not poor!" eagerly exclaim¬ ed the nun ; ** sav rather. fa i oiired Ma- thilde ! for, tottering on the very brink, Heaven snatched me from------" " My father V fearfully interrupted Corisande, trembling, dreading the con¬ clusion. " True," said the nun, entering at once into the feelings of her youthful auditor ; ff the same de Roussillon is your father, is the husband of Hortense ; yet, yet, my child, you must arm your mind for deception, yon must prepare it for treachery. My heart harbours no re¬ sentment, it throbs not with revenge, it has ceased to writhe beneath the pang of jealousy ; cleansed, I frust, from the mor¬ tal infirmity of passion, it can accord forgiveness, it can sue for mercy/' " But my mother?" implored Cori¬ sande, as eagerly she snatched the arm of the nun; tf tell me, sister, of my mo- ther»
ther. ín this chamber she watched the signal of departure, she awaited the ap¬ proach of Drusiile." fi Yes, in this chamber," replied the mm ; (t yet, even when the expected sig¬ nal was given, your mother moved not ; nay, when the impatient Drusiile opened the door, she stood a breathing statue, her arms folded on her bosom, her face white as that bosoms snow. I snatched myself from lier embrace-—I almost push¬ ed her into the passage—* 'Tis Everard cajls, 'tis Everard waits!* I whispered ; * Everard, at the foot of the altar, chides delay.—Fly, fly, Hortense 1 and seal the vows of faith ľ She did fly, she did hasten down the çallerv ; never, never shall I forget the moment í distance closed up¬ on her figure ; the moment her flitting steps ceased to sound upon my ear, a sadness, almost amounting to despair, iced my spirits; I gazed around the chamber, I wept, I shu Idered, the sha¬ dows of death seemed to crowd upon ihe с б boli tude,
solitude, whilst fancy minified the moaning blast even to the groaning struggles of апци, h î knch, l pıa^cd for the felicity of my brother, of my ч^- ter; yet it was long ere I could агцие my feelings into composure ; and е\еч when I returned to my о'лп apai ttrent, when 1 wooed the calm oblivion of re¬ pose, phantoms of fearful import ílitted o'er my pillow, starts oï fcveied wildness frightened rest, ťť I arose w ith the eat liest daun, and hurrying on my clothes, mounted to my casement, and watched the grev -tint¬ ed east, even till it glowed with the saf¬ fron glare of radiance ; 1 saw the murky vapours yield to the gradual схрапчоп of dav-— I heard the matin bell summon the sisterhood to devotion, yet I shrunk not at the threatened displeasure of the mother superior. " I descended to the chapel, I listened to the disappearance of Hortense, to the desertion of the portress; and to the questions
quLNlions of incen ed authority, boldly acknowledged mv abetting i ì tf.e flight. Wlal was the ure^d of reprehension to tnc ^ mv sojournment at St. Hono»ée was tempotary ; no power could with¬ hold me from the claims of kindred, and mv hea! t told me my brother, my lover, ard mv tnend, would soon recai me ю the bins of freedom. ' k Fallacious hope! cruel, cruel dream Cif never-wakenini» jov f Days wore away, and suspense nave place to apprehen- si m ; week aííer week succeeded, and biv.l л blank and doubtful fciiee.ee prevail¬ ed ; Ьоре theatcd wiih a thousand im· pïobaUluie.s; and \shen a messenger ar¬ ia eci at the convent, when the lady ab* bess broke the seal of the marquis de Roussillon's packet, my mind was ill arm¬ ed for the disclosure. Full of sanguine expectation, 1 marked the features of the superior, my heart throbbing at every variation of countenance, my thoughts picturing de Koussilion almost at the grate.
grate. Judge then my feelings when ï heard the name of Hortense coupled with de Roussillon's, when I saw the written announcement of their marriage. Shud¬ dering, gasping, î snatched the letter from the hands of our holy mo her; my eyes wildly wandered o'er the contents— a burning fire felt to consume my brain —the weight of worlds to press upon my heart ! ï could not weep—I could not articulate one reproach—the faculties of speech, the powers of animation seemed numbed, suspended, lost ! f * Alarmed at mv statue-like inaction, the nuns flocked around me ; they hore me unresisting to my chamber, yet they could not excite one tear, they could not extort one symptom of acknowledge¬ ment. A blank, a rayless blank succeed¬ ed ; frenzy flashed on animation, and months wore away ere í regained the bitter privilege of memory.—But why weary you with the dull, slow progress of convalescence? why exhaust the pass¬ ing
big hour with the recapitulation of my mental struggles ? perfidy had steeped the name of friend in gall; and ihe io- ver, in whom my earthly hopes had cen* tred, had robbed, had bereaved me of my peace ! (< Suspense and anguish at the mysteri¬ ous silence of my ill-fated brother was not the least heavy of my trials; murder was ever the horrid close of each ideal picture ! for what, save the loss of life, could produce a change so dire ? Twelve heavy months had numbered o'er my wretchedness ere I received an assurance of my brother's life; better had 1 been without that assurance ! he came but to agitate the mind resigned to the joyless calling of religion. Pardon me, Hea¬ ven ! rather should I bless his coming. for in clearing the suspected purity of Hortense, it awakened me from the heavy slumber of injustice, I had taxed her as a traitress to love, to honour, to friend¬ ship ; I had coupled her name with all that
that was opprobrious; ï had yielded al¬ most to the pernicious encroachments of hatred ; I had engendered the baleful poison of jealousy, even until the inno¬ cent object of my late regard had be¬ come the festering antidote to resigna¬ tion. Hapless, imured Hortense ! how blind is human judgment ! how confined is human foresight 1 little did I suspect that thou wert a victim more pitiable than myself, that thou too wert bleeding be¬ neath the machinations of treachery .'*' The nun wept ; Corisande wept with her; the one at the remembered, the other at the suspected tale of sufferance. Iť It was at the close of profession/' pursued sister Mathilde, " when my head bowed beneath the sable shroud of inau¬ guration, that a convulsed and agitated- murmur attracted even my eyes to the opposite corner of the chapel. The cru¬ cifix trembled in my hand ; the priests, the nuns, the altar, all faded from sight;· nought remained save the worn, the pale, the
the almost spectre im-xge of Kverard· He clung to the death-c^kl marble, he spuke not, but his eyes were ri vet ted on my features. I darted forward—1 forgot the solemnity of worship ; alive but to the propelling force of nature, I threw myself upon his bosom, I railed him bro¬ ther, I kissed his shrunken hands, 1 gazed upon his care-worn countenance* It was Everard, late so happy, late so san¬ guine—now so dejected, now so subdu¬ ed. Saints of mercy, what a meeting ! how convulsed, how frenzied the pres¬ sure of ncver-d) ing interest ί how deep, Low agonizing the Hysteric sobs of woe ! " It was long, very long, ere the calm, smooth reign of composure was restored —ere 1 learnt the tragic close to our late gay dreams of promise—ere Everard, in the parlour of the convent, unfolded the insidious wiles of prosperous, of imply¬ ing villany ! Lured in the toii, confiding, relying on the professions of friendship, he ) iclded to the directions f dc Rous¬ sillon
«ilion —he penned the fatal trammel Ш unsuspecting love^—he bid Hortense sub¬ mit herself to the guidance of Drmtlle — he bid her fmr not though the chapd shouM be dark / Ali-seeing Heaven ľ how could he dive beneath a guise so subtle, beneath з policy so profound ? how could his open, his ingenuous nature, uncloak a being whose seeming actions barred suspicion? ** The sombre grey of twilight had Succeeded the glare of day, when the happy, the hope-fraught Everard, issued from his hiding place, from that lone cottage on the moan tain side, now trans¬ formed to the bower of bliss—that cot¬ tage intended as the sanctuary of wed¬ ded love—that cottage in which the fu¬ gitives were to sojourn, until active, zealous friendship had paved the way to a father's pardon. Hortense glowed on his daylight visions, St. Honorée lay be¬ fore his eyes ; he had lost sight of the cottage, he had pierced the shadow of the
the hanging wood, Alas ! he dreamt not the stealing step of the assassin—he felt not the death-atmed blow ; reeling, stun¬ ned, the struggle for life seemed passed; and when he awoke to recollection, days had intervened, and distance had closed upon the late scene of promised felicity. My brother found himself a prisoner," pursued sister Mathilde, after an agoni¬ zing pause, " he found himself deceived, he found himself the dupe of treachery , he k*iew Hortense the wife of de Rous¬ sillon, and yet he survived the blow. * £ Watched by the iniquitous slaves of power, months wore away ; and when, in the hour of relaxing vigilance, he «t length stole from the murderous haunt, it was with that burning thirst of ven¬ geance which threatened destruction to his hated foe. He paused not till he reached the chateau de Roussillon ; dis¬ guised, enfeebled, he lurked amidst its shades, The marquis was absent—but he
he beheld the marchioness, he beheld Hortense drooping with treasured grief; he followed to the boat-house solitude- he saw her fondle her infant boy—he saw her bathe his blooming cheek with tears; she was alone, no attendant watched her footsteps, no intruding ear caught the frenzied shriek which spoke the moment of recognition. Dreadful, dreadful was that moment, yet did Everard. cling to it ssthe last frail remnant of bliss, as the perishing memorial of remaining love. He supported her in his arms—he knelt to her as the living idol of his worship— nor, till she breathed the name of husband, did he recai. the bar of separation ; then did the fury of revenge lighten up his faded features—-then did he swear to an¬ nihilate the traitor, who had wrought destruction to his hopes ! But Hortense pleaded for the father of her babe ; she soothed, she argued, she sofiened even the bursts of jealous passion. Everard listened
listened—Everard wept—he yielded to her guidance—he sunk the pliant convert to her will, " Drusiile had been the active agent of de Roussillon ; she had led Hortense from St. Honorée— she had supported her to the consecrated chapel of an almost ad¬ joining hermitage. Darkness had favour¬ ed the design ; the low whispers of de Roussillon were mistaken for the timid cautions of love; and Hortense, agitated, trembling, plighted her virgin faith. " Alarmed by the half hints of her in¬ sidious bridegroom, she suffered herself to be led in darkness to the cottage, The pretended emissaries of the marquis her father were a sufficient plea for the existence of caution ; no light gladden¬ ed the interior of the dwelling, no voice breathed fonder than a whisper. Hor¬ tense trembled, yet she hushed her feaife on the supposed bosom of Everard. " The waning hours of ni^ht passed away ; Hortense slept—better had she never
never awakened; yet she did awake- she awoke to see the broad bright glare of day playing on the features of de Roussillon ! Poor Hortense ! what were my trials to the trial of that moment ! I had been deceived, but thou wert be¬ trayed ; ï had been deserted, but thon wert lost, irrevocably lost to hope, to bare content ! Madness had been buss, annihilation mercy.—But I will not seek to pourtray her anguish ; I will not shock you with a misery so profound. It was long ere your father—ere her father could allay the tumult in her mind—ere the almost frenzied bride could subjugate her feelings—ere, submitting to dire ne¬ cessity, she could see, she could acknow¬ ledge her husband—nay, not till a dearer claimant urged even nature in his favour, not till an innocent, a helpless candidate .^leaded a father's cause, did she submit to the decisions of imperious duty ; yet even then she dared not breathe her lo- vex*s name, she dared not venture one inquiry ;
inquiry ; pent υρ in her almost bursting heart was the secret of her wrongs ; for to accuse de Roussillon was to criminate her father*—her father, alike active in the fatal snares of treachery —alike zealous in the overthrow of confiding love. Sub¬ mission was all that remained to her, and though almost death-fraught were her pangs, yet did she struggle for the bare assumption of content. Buried in the calm retirement of the chateau, left alone to ramble amid 4s picturesque wilds, she prayed for fortitude, she prayed for re¬ signation. Her spirit was broken, even though the returning blush of health spread its hght g?ow upon her cheeks ; for though by dire necessity she was at times compelled to mingle wiih the thoughtless and the gay, she felt dead to the world, as though a cloistered sister of St. Honorée. Anticipation, that best balm to the aching heart, was excluded, lost; the past was a forbidden field—the future
future was uncheered by one single ray of promise. ** Such was the state of her mind when Everard burst upon her sight—when, kneeling at her feet, he heaped the bit¬ terest curses on the guilty de Roussillon, Hortense held her unconscious babe ίο view—* His father ľ she murmured, as she deluged his little face with her tears n ** The cherub smile of the infant Mor¬ tatene disarmed m v unfortunate brother; he wept in the anguish of his heart—he breathed no more the imprecations of revenge. Guided by the persuasions, by the remonstrances, by the wishes of Hor tense, he submitted to the fiat of destiny ; he tore himself from her presence, he tven consented to linger no more amidst the shades of the chateau, to seek no more the presence of the marquis. * f Such was the solution to my inqui¬ ries," pursued the nun, " such the tale whiďb in clearing the spotless purity of HortensCy
Hortense, cast a deeper shadow on the politic de Roussillon. But, alas! the re¬ cital lightened not the weight of woe, cheered not the heart-broken Everard—™ he heeded not the force of argument, he bowed not to the decisions of reason ; his whole feelings were in arms, his whole soul warred against the triumphs, execra¬ ted the machinations of the traitor. tf Cheated of every comfort, bereaved of the slightest remnant of hope, spirit- broken, despairing, his was more that en¬ forced submission to necessity, than the meek humility, the gentle acquiescence which owns its birth to resignation ; his brow was contracted, his arms folded, his lips trembled, his every feature convul¬ sed. < Whither would you go ?' I de¬ manded, as he motioned to depart. *' He gazed at me for a moment in si¬ lence, then, with a shuddering sigh, re¬ plied— ς I care not whither ; any where, lo escape from my fellow men ! The wild beasts of the forest are more to be tnist- voi, IJI. j) i4 î ;
^d ; instinct directs to their prey—in¬ stinct immolates the bleeding offering; but man, murdering peace, hoodwinks with professions—man breaks the trust¬ ing heart hissubtilties inveigled !' " Alas!" sighed sister Mathilde, " from such a parting, from a frame so debilita¬ ted, from a mind so jaundiced, can you wonder that the persevering silence of years confirmed the suspicion of my bro¬ ther's death ? can you wonder that at the altar of my devotions I have prayed for the repose of his soul—that in the solitude of *my cell I have wept for him as for one who had been ? nay, more— lell me, my young friend, can you won¬ der that when, in the breathing shadow of St. Honorée's new confessor, I recog¬ nised my ever regretted, my ever-beloved Everard, I should have been conveyed senseless from the chapel?" " Your brother !" exclaimed the as- .tonished Corisasde; íť father Eustache vour brother! then is his agitation ex- plained^
plained, then are his words elucidated ; for even midst a cloister's gloom was the image of his lost Hortense remembered," t( Say even until death/' solemnly re¬ joined the nun ; " for the last frail liga¬ ment of mortality will throb with the image of your mother. The kindling fire of love burns not alike transient ; with some it is evanescent, with some eternal ; even the nipping frost of age cannot expunge it, cannot allay the raging flame; it banished Everard the haunts of his fellow-beings, it annihila¬ ted the claims of social intercourse, It pierced midst the gloomy hermitage of his choice, it wrested oft his midnight thoughts from Heaven." (< Unfortunate, injured Everard i "sigh¬ ed Corisande ; and then she shuddered, for she remembered the author of his misfortunes—the author of his injuries, was——her father ! " The designs of Providence are dark, Are mysterious,"observed sister Mathilde, n $ entering
entering at once into her feelings. <( Had Everard been the son of prosperous for¬ tune, he might have ceased to have been grateful ; as it is, he is resigned and pa¬ tient. Wedded to the pernicious joys of this world, man forgets the slight tenure of his hold: for, alas! too often in ad¬ versity alone does the heart retain humi¬ lity f ÍS How and where did poor father Eus¬ tache wear out the long, long years from youth to age?"asked Corisande. ŕŕ Whi¬ ther did he sojourn when he dragged his hst less frame from St. Honorée ?" <4 in a lone and melancholy defile, scarce two leagues from the chateau de Roussillon,"replied the nun; " in the va¬ cated hermitage of father Jerome, our late confessor^ screened from the piercing eye of observation, did he harbour the canker-woira melancholy, till it tinged, till it mildewed evefy spring of hope, rill health and energy, nay, almost exer- lion, sank beneath the sad indulgence '" ·* And
" And yet he revived to hope, he re¬ vived to interest/'said Corisande; (t in tho preservation of the infant Louis, in the endearments of early gratitude, he felt that the social claims of nature can¬ not be expunged." i( True/' observed the sister; " Louis varied the tenor of his being, Louis gra¬ dually stole his thoughts from the absorp¬ tion of care. In cultivating a neglected mind, he found that c\en he could be * re¬ fill ; he found, too, that the arduous task was as a balm to his own woes, for in be- çuilinjGt the listlessness of time, it varied the monotony of existence. Such arc the claims which unite us to each othei, such the mutual bond of fellowship, such the common law of obligation* Dispo¬ sitions may \arv, but the colouring re- mains the .same ; for not in the aggre¬ gate of God's creation breathes there aa animal so dependant as w n î"
d 3
CHAP.
ШАР ΤΐΓ ЪМ111 . iii« Let youth beware or t<ne ; Ol' ibe smooch glance be «are, i\te 'th too lut ψ W læn on ihe soul the torrent softness pom> ; Then wisdom prostrate ties—while the fond soul, Wrap t iu gay visions of unreal bliss, Suli painit tlť illusive гост. TuoasoK. MoRTAiGNK was lost, was entranced; every feeling of his nature subjugated, every impulse of his heart new formed. Ga¬ brielle, the gentle, timid Gabrielle, gave energy to hope, gave zest to enterprise; .she was the vision bright of fancy ; hers the witching smile which distanced all the hopes of high ambition. In absence, imagination could picture no other ob¬ ject; memory treasured every sigh, every tear,
Гезг, every half-stolen glance, every half- yielding, half-reluctant acquiescence ; passion snatched the reins of reason— love dissipated the once-binding princi¬ ples of duty. His father, his mother, his sister, all vanished in the scaie of prepos¬ session. The slave of feeling, borne like a bubble on the wave, he yielded to each passing gust ; and ere he paused to re¬ flect upon the step he was taking, he had crossed the denle, and pierced the little copse which shadowed the low grave of the stranger. The evening was serene, fhe sun was slowly sinking, its brightest burnish tinged the tall heads of the mourning cypress; no sound was stir¬ ring; no busy hum of animated nature ; the breeze scarce played amidst the fo¬ liage, scarce ruffled the broad calm sur¬ face of the river. Mortaigne gazed upon the scene, gazed upon the curling smoke which marked the distant dwelling o r the dame, gazed till every magic outline; d I mingling
Gabrielle. It was not the force of fancy, ir was indeed Gabrielle whom he beheld, Gabrielle bending over the hallowed £iave of the stranger. île sprang forward ; yet momentary was the thrill of pleasure which glowed upon her cheek ; she extended her hand, but her features resumed their sadness. Fanting to unfold the project which oc¬ cupied every feeling of his nature, he chided her dejection, he besought her to banish every care but love. She looked fearfully at him ; his cheeks were flushed, his eyes sparkled with the fire of radiant hope. <ť I come a suppli¬ ant/' he exclaimed, as he drew her from the grave, " a suppliant for more than life. Gabrielle, our hearts are known to each other ; delicacy needs no prelude ; the intercourse of sentiment, the recipro¬ city of taste, is ? foundation more firm than whole years of cold acquaintance/* He
He paused, but she continued silent; he gazed upon her, but her eyes were bent to the ground. * { My father summons me hence/* he pursued. i( In three da}s I journey ία Paris." Gabrielle started. ** Yet, ere í go," resumed the count* earnestly peruring the variations of her countenance, f * 1 would lighten the pang of absence—1 would ensure the stimulus of ι eí urn. If vou had a father, if vou had a mother, on mv knees would I crave vou at their hands! as it is, Gabrielle, dear, dearest Gabrielle ! be generous ; banish the frigid maxims of decorum ; be one destiny ours, one fate, one hope, one happiness! Already have our hearts forged the eternal rivet ; Gabrielle, sola object of my fond, my faithful vows, steal with me to the altar, and let Ileavei* secretly sanction those claims whicli nought but ambition can oppose." " Mas! \ол know not the hand you dj covet/*
covet," faltered the agitated girl. €t Rash, misjudging Mortaigne ! you would wed a being worse than friendless/' " I would wed an angel !" exclaimed the count, his heart swelling high with joy and triumph. Gabrielle raised her eves from the ground ; she fixed them on him with an expression of tempered pleasure, a de¬ light, an extacy, modulated by internal conviction. " Would you,"she demand¬ ed, her hand trembling within his, and her cheeks glowing with the thrill of he¬ roism, " take a being so destitute to your bosom ? Deaf to worldly fame, blind to the incitements of ambition, would you select one whom you have known but in adversity—one whose first introduction was at best doubtful and mysterious— one------ if Banish the hateful past," eagerly in* terrupted Mortaigne. " Gabrielle, I know all you would say ; think but of the future, think ef nought but bliss. My paient^
parents will be your parents, my sister will be your sister, my friends will be your friends. Grant me the pledge I so¬ licit, and I shall submit ίο the commands of the marquis with something like com¬ posure. I shall leave Provence with con¬ tent, for my heart will feel the blessed assurance that fate cannot part us." " Fate shall not part us," said Gabri¬ elle, with an energy all her own ; t: nei¬ ther must the malediction of a father be defied» I will remove to St. Honorée ; secure in that asvlum, relying on the ef¬ forts of persevering love, í vill wait the auspicious moment, when, enriched with a parent's sanction, you shall claim me as your own." 44 Never, never will that moment come i" exclaimed the shuddering Mor¬ taigne. " Borne by the towering strides of ambition, my father seeks for nought but elevation ; yet may he pardon what he would not sanction. Securely mine, 1 have no fear; nature will plead for me, d ii and
and your soft virtues bring him to con¬ fess that happiness, not grandeur, is the fairest price. My mother, too, will join her voice to mine—my sister—all will aid me ! 'tis you, the spring of every earthlv joy, you, Gabrielle, must yield, must show example !" (i To you I would show the example of submission," said Gabrielle, mournful¬ ly ; *' compliance, duty is the track in which we ought to tread : you must go, my lord; you must attend a father's call; while Í, guided bv your wish, affianced 'by that firmest claim, the heart, will so¬ journ in yon cottage, or St. Honorée." " Ko, not at St. Honorée/* eagerly re¬ joined the count, " nor in this mountain solitude, but as my bride. A strange presentiment of evil bids me secure my prize ; mine is not the start of ardent, frenzied love—neither is it the gust of sudden passion; the one may fade away, the other yield to time and circum¬ stances ; it is that within which bids me grasp
grasp the moment of auspicious destiny -—*tis that within which whispers, a bless* ing slighted oft, is lost for ever!" Gabrielle sighed. S{ Last nigut," he continues gaztng on the tears which stole in silence down her cheeks, " the past was recapitulated, the future fancied ; last night the moment of heroic courage was recalled, and every look and every word which led to cease¬ less homage ; last night I saw the life you saved blessed—cursed at your deci¬ sion î Tis folly, 'tis madness to disguise my feelings ; read then my heart, read every past and present hope. I have struggled to repel a passion against which the pride of human reason oft essays in vain—to restrain my feelings within the calm cold bounds of friendship—to curb every opposing ilight—to silence every rising wish; I have mused over the mi¬ sery of parental objection^—I have mag¬ nified each hydra obstacle—I have tried to banish myself your presence, to bend my
my steps to other haunts—I have essayed the extremes of conviviality and soli¬ tude : all, all proved insufficient ! Ga¬ brielle, your influence is omnipotent ; you tyrannize over every feeling of my nature. If I sleep, it is to dream of your perfections. Be merciful, restore my life to peace, and my father yet will live to bkss you as the saviour of his son; for, torn from your presence, creation becomes a desert, and every blessing vouth and health can offer embittered and despised !" " Alas !" murmured Gabrielle* íf mv reason and my feelings are at war. Try mè no further ! I would retain the balm of self-esteem. Go, go, my lord; attend a father's summons, nor fear that absence can expunge your image." " Not fear!" exclaimed Mortaigne; " alas, how little can you know of love ! my heart is racked, is torn by a thousand fears; it is made up of anxiety, of doubt, of pain, of perplexity ; one moment flushed
flushed with the fever of hope, the next drooping with despondence; now free as the uncurbed winds, and now shack¬ led with indescribable dread, Gabrielle, this tumuli cannot last ; reject me, and I fly fo the furthest pole, renounce my name, my friends, my eountry ! Lost, despairing, I------" " Reject you !" interrupted Gabrielle, in a tone so sad as to sever even the en¬ thusiastic flight of impetuous love. i( Forgive me !" implored the count, terrified at the lily hue of her cheek ; bi transported by tyrannic passion, I lose sight of reason, even of humanity ! breathe but pardon, and my heart, my con¬ duct shall be tempered by your wish !" " How can í pardon without offence?" said Gabrielle, moving slowly down the defile ; " words may give pain, without exciting anger." ' f A thousand lives would I sacrifice/* resumed Mortaigne, " rather than pain that gentle bosom. I ask but the right to
to shield it from the rough keen blast of misfortune— ï crave but a lawful claim to its confidence and love !" For a moment Gabrielle hesitated—her eyes were directed towards heaven, her hand grasped the ensign ia of her wor¬ ship; then suddenly turning towards her lover, she pointed to the distant cypress shade, nor paused till within its gloomy shadow. " Honour crumbles the barrier imposed !" she exclaimed; ťí where, where can pride be more completely humbled than on the grave of youth and loveli¬ ness ? и " What mea л you ?" questioned the count, unable to decipher the momenta¬ rv crimson of her cheek, the animated lustre of her eye. " í mean to arouse a thousand pleaders against me," replied Gabrielle, with a me¬ lancholy smile; " í mean to arm even yotfc against the weakness of your own feelings/' " Impossible V 1 said Mortaigne, in ac¬ cents of incredulity, " Nay j
* f Nay, do not interrupt me, M resumed Gabrielle; ίζ J mean to tell you the being upon whom you lavish such a world of tenderness. The first recollection i have is the vintage of industry, in which in¬ dulgence suffered me to cull the grape's rich Clusters. The incident is trivial in itself, but like many other local remem¬ brances, thousands tread upon its heels. The features of my foster-mother, the little dwelling in which she so carefully reared me, all crowd upon my feelings, all darken the blank which succeeded.** '* Spare yourself the recital/' implored Mortatene, as Gabrielle vainly strove to suppress a tear. " Silence would be weakness/' replied the animated girl ; ŕ no, my friend, your generous enthusiasm forbids the possibi- liiy of dışgöç; my heart cannot be probed in a belter cause, and though ϊ mav hurry over the sense of degradation, its source shall be revealed. ín that cot- íi£C, yv a> α summer*« sun, was the m о ruin ic
morning of my life ; no pang intruded, no keen sense of sorrow festered on my heart ; in the latitude of uncurbed spirits î sported through the day, and at night 1 slumbered but to awake afresh to enjoy¬ ment, în this happy obscurity, for ten 1 whole years did í bask in the smiles of fortune, and even then my heaviest care was atransient removal from the bosom of thi% imagined parent, î was to so* journ at the convent of St. Magdeléne, î was no longer to ex'bt in my state o? peaceful ignorance. The mandate wa** imperious, and not till sobbing in her arms, was 1 told that to affection, not to nature, was î indebted for her kindness. Kever shall I forget the pang inflicted ; h was as the death of my tranquillity, for it teemed with a thousand wild and shape¬ less ideas; it engendered an eternal gan¬ grene in my mind, it filled me with in¬ quietude and regret. Unconscious e\en of a name, ï was committed to the charge of the holy superior—I became a boar¬ der
der of St. Magdeléne— my young heart, framed for tenderness, needing but ther genial breath of kindness to register the most trivial offerings of compassion. But, alas ! that compassion sapped not my feelings; no bosom supplied the pillow of my foster-mother's. Buried in the profound gloom of their cloister, frozen by its uncongenial strictness, studying to' extirpate that mortal infirmity, interest, the nuns lived but for devotion, lived but for self-mortification, but for self- endurance. With my years my ideas expanded ; I saw nought to conciliate, nought to covet ; I shrunk from the pale livery of long watching ; and when the a*xl o u r of devotion ascended to heaven, my prayer was ever to escape the infec¬ tion of bigo-try, was never to become a nun !" ,f May Heaven register that prayer!" exclaimed Mortaigne, with an enthusiasm which dappled tlìe fair cheek of the nar¬ rator; her timid eve shrunk from the цч ,;г е
gaze of her lover, as, with a faint smile, she continued— " Left to the wild exuberance of ¡ma· gination, can it be wondered that I should picture every thing perfect, that I should be unlettered in the wiles of deception, and credulous to every pretence ? My knowledge of the world was gleaned in my casual visits to my foster-mother ; and though from her lips I could obtain no solution to the mystery of my birth* yet 1 knew that her actions were amen¬ able to a hidden influence—I knew, at the hour of recaí, I was to be torn from her; and though my heart clung to her as the tender nurse of my helplessness, yet did my fancy deck in every virtue the imaged form of an unknown mother, I w r as in the garden of our cottage, sup¬ porting the infirm steps of my foster-pa¬ rent, when two strangers paused at the gate. They were mounted on mules, and led a third by the bridle. I know not why, but my heart died within me ,¬ Ι looked
ï looked at the dame, and I saw her checks, like my own, become colourless, A universal trembling seized me; and when the written warrant of authority was given, when ï saw the tears stream from the eyes of my friend, I too wept, in dread of coming sorrow. The stran¬ gers smiled ; that smile was conclusive, divesting them even of their embassy— from that moment they became hateful. No time for delay was allowed, no leave- taking even of the sisterhood ; consigned to the care of Leontine and Baudouin, early on the morrow, I was to quit the home of my infancy, in promise of the shelter of a mother's arms; my heart glowed with that promise, even when I wept my speedy removal. The dame dared not remonstrate ; awed by a secret but unguessed-at influence, she wept; but she delayed not the moment' of de¬ parture—* Do not forget me!' she im¬ plored, as slie strained me to her bosom ; * even amidst the rich and the great, re¬ member,
member,-sometimes remember how ten¬ derly ï have loved you !' Here was a new field for conjecture; and as in si¬ lence I proceeded by the sides of my es¬ corts, visions -@f the most cheating illu¬ sion spread themselves before me« Lone and wild were the tracks we traversed ; Leontine, in conversation, sought to be* guile the distance; but when I spoke of my mother, when I questioned whither we were going, his answers were evasive, his manner enigmatical. Baudouin was silent, but his fixed and unlicensed gaze covered my face with blushes; and when the more gentle Leontine breathed the whispers of admiration, the fiend-like glance of his companion filled me with dismay. Their aspect was fierce, their dress warlike ; they seemed to laugh at danger, to defy fatigue. In answer to my complaints, I was told thai the dis¬ tance was long—that we had to traverse passes impervious to carriage wheels— that the garb of fierceness was necessary to
to repel the attacks of banditti—and that the difficulties once surmounted, com¬ fort, ease, and luxury, would be min**. I tried to believe all I heard, yet did my coward heart teem with a thousand dreads ; I stood alone, as it were, in the world, banished every thing social, con¬ signed to the charge of beings rough and ungentle as the tracks through which we wandered. On everv side nature was seen in gigantic masses—mountains, ca¬ taracts, forests, crowding the prospect, dispersed patches of vegetation mocking barrenness, and succulent vines clingm«: to hardy pine-trees. Time had been when such images would have av kened awe and admiration—when I should have lingered over each scene—when I should have marked the foaming course of the impetuous cataract; but now every suc¬ ceeding charm was lost. I trusted mv¬ self to the guidance of the sure-footed nuile, nor heeded the overhanging crags, though fantastically fringed with large clusters
clusters of blue and yellow gentians, blossoming with the Alp-rose. Day suc¬ ceeded day, and still we traversed the mountains, no human habitation afford¬ ing shelter from the night dews, and slumber was sparingly snatched beneath the excavations of the rocks." Mortaigne started, his cheek flushed crimson, he gzzed fearfully on Gabrielle; she deciphered the glance of jealousy, she shuddered at the remembrance of the past—yet she could meet his eye, she could revise that past without the blush of shame. " 'Tis true/' she continued, faintly smiling, ' s that when I sank upon the earth for rest, when ï looked np to Hea¬ ven for hope, I had exhausted every re¬ source ; yet that Heaven gave me suc¬ cour, and upheld me in the hour of trial/' " Proceed!" implored Mortaigne, cf in mercy proceed !" £t The mask of deception vanished/' pursued Gabrielle, ts and my impassion¬ ed
ed guides soon became embroiled in deadly animosity. î heard the threat of invective, I saw the glance of fury, and I trembled for my own destiny ; I ar* raigned the rash confidence of my deceiv¬ ed mother, yet never once did í dream the fatal overthrow of my hopes, never once did I suspect her ! " She paused in horror, then with an anguished sob resumed— tf It was in a deep and melancholy valley, hemmed in by towering precipices, that, almost fainting under the vertical rays of the sun, we stopped for rest. The moment for procedure arrived, but the mules had wandered in search of pasturage ; and whilst Leontine was absent, Baudouin — M She hesitated, she shook her golden locks over her face, she buried her burning cheeks on her bosom. if The villain dared abuse his trust !" exclaimed the indignant Mortaigne ; " Ive dared profane the ears of purity with vol» nr. e the
the vile plaints of his unhallowed pas¬ sion!' 1 Gabrielle gained courage by the in¬ terruption— " My shriek recalled Leon¬ tine/' she continued, u and the return of Leontine was marked with blood. Dread¬ ful was the fury of the combatants ; the clash, the death-groan was one ; and while on my knees I petitioned Heaven for mercy, Heaven scaled my safety in the fall of Baudouin!" " Your safety !" fearfully observed Mortaigne ; " your safety whilst Leon¬ tine lived !" c( Leontine was a different being to Baudouin," replied Gabrielle ; " fierce by nature, love softened him to cowardice. Never did he lose sight of respect, never did he approach me but with the homage he would have approached a saint." " May Heaven remit his sins P* ardent¬ ly exclaimed Mortaigne. u Nay," pursued Gabrielle, u on the body
body of the unfortunate being wh* by his hand, he vowed to resr charge I and I too, grateful for с position vowed——" <f What did you vow?" eagerly inter¬ rupted the count, fÇ I vowed/' said Gabrielle, t( if called upon, to exonerate him from the charge of malice or design—I vowed never to forget the benefice. We quitted the val¬ ley, nor did we again pause until we reached a black, melancholy ruin, totter¬ ing on the bank of a wide and rapid ri ver. The last brilliant tints of day had given place to gloom, and the moon, long since arisen, checkered the nodding pile with a thousand fantastic shadows; awe, wonder, distrust, apprehension, alike stole upon my spirits. ' What do you fear V questioned Leontine. * Alas, í know not/I replied; and then I trembled, for I read in his steady gaze an expres¬ sion which I could not decipher. * In a spot like this/ he rejoined, ( shut out f 9 from
from the reach of succour, alone, unpro¬ tected, dare you brave me ? dare you re¬ ject a passion which n attire has stamped eternal ? Reflect but a moment—you are in my power; within this ruin I pos¬ sess sufficient influence and authority to constitute it a prison or a grave ! Re¬ member------* * I care not for your threat!' I exclaim ed, interrupting him ; ŕ ƒ tremble not at your menace ľ and ral¬ lying every particle of courage, I told him, even "ή his end was murder, I shrunk not from the stroke ! The disputation was long, yet he dared not exert the power he boasted ; nay, he summoned his colleagues for a different purpose ; and when, nt the blast of a horn, a boat approached the shore, encouraged by the prospect of «oon beholding my mother, of soon feeling safe within her protec¬ tion, I stepped into the boat, and was rowed up the stream. For many hours ihe men laboured at the oar, not even the darkness of night relaxing their ex¬ ertions,
errions. Leontine placed himself at my side; he strove to reassure my spi¬ rits ; but suspicion was awakened, and every whisper ï heard, every sign I saw, served buí to swell it into terror. The spot upon which we landed was of sin¬ gular boldness ; the dark, thick vapours of night still clung to the craggy peaks, combatting with vain resistance the gra¬ dual swell of radiance. Distant cataracts roared in thunder, and mountain tower¬ ing upon mountain seemed coeval with the skies. The boat was moored beneath an excavation of rock, and the discharge of an arquebuse was quickly re-echoed in distance. The signal blast of a horn was next given, and, almost with the ra¬ pidity of thought, a troop, habited as Leontine, emerged from an adjoining pinc-forcst. The certainty of treachery stagnated the powers of speech ; I saw myself betrayed, lost; the horrors of con¬ viction pressed upon my spirits, and death, in any form, would have been e ^ bailed
hailed as a release from threatened ill. I drew my veil over my face— Τ shrunk from ihe gaze of numbers— leven clung to the arm of Leontine, as though know¬ ledge had familiarized me to his fierce¬ ness ; and when he spoke asiue to his companions, when they withdrew them¬ selves from sight, I felt grateful for his eourtesv." *' How could you feel grateful ? how could you feel secure in such protec¬ tion ?" reproachfully questioned Mor¬ taigne. * { Alas!" sighed Gabrielle, fí where lay the alternative? where securitv for the dove İn the pounces of the eagle ?" " True," said the cotait ; '- but pro¬ ceed, 1 pine to release you from the in¬ fluence of this Leontine." " ît was mid-Jay," pursued Gabrielle, " when we delved a valle v of uncommon beauty; on every side Ceres scattered her rich profusion—flowers blossomed in wild luxuriance-—fruits, blushing in ruby clusters
clusters, tempted the wandering eye. Leontine, softened by the calm serenity of earth and heaven, revived the theme of his ardent hopes : he besought com¬ passion, he supplicated mercy; he spoke of himself as one lost alike to worldly and immortal good, as one whom nought but the miracle of love could snatch from destruction. He essayed me alike with threats and prayers—he spoke of the death-struggles of Baudouin, of the blood which jealousy had shed, of the blood which jealousy mhht shed here¬ after. But, though policy lent an ear to his threats, resolution never wavered ; î told him gratitude was the highest price 1 could offer, and that even gratitude was withheld until he had restored me in safety to my mother; 1 bid him delay no longer—I bid him'summon his party and quit the valley. The same signal en¬ sued, the arquebuse was fired, was re¬ echoed by numbers, and again w T ere we surrounded by the fierce and warlike e 4 band,
band. We toiled up the rocky steep, anti, fatigued and panting, remounted the mules which awaited us on the sum¬ mit." Gabrielle hesitated; she pressed her hand upon her heart, as, with a shudder¬ ing sigh, she concluded—" We paused not again until we reached tin moulder¬ ing ruins, the treacherous tower which once cheated you into imagined se¬ curity/* if The tower which contained the he¬ roic preserver of my life," gratefully ob¬ served Mortaigne, pressing the hand of the agitated girl to his lips. "The tower/" said Gabrielle, " which promised a solution to the mystery— which was whispered as the haven of my fui ure reit t the rude and comfortless as¬ pect filled me with dismay; yet still I strove to quell suspicion, stili 1 strove to cherish hope. Ah ! judge then my disappointment, judge then my horror, when, to the ungentle inmate of that tower,
tower, I was tokLto bend the knee in fi¬ lial homage." * f Impossible !" exclaimed Mortaigne, pitying the menial an^uHi of the narra¬ tor. * r That íiend, ihat woman, your mother !—impossible ! Heaven sanctions no such outrage !" Gabrielle could onlv sob. €t Some deception has been practised, some deep-laid scheme pursued," eager¬ ly continued the count. fci Your mo¬ ther! no, no; not one lineament of heart or feature het ruv s similitude: but proceed with your story ; tell me how· this pretended mother received her angel' child?" ţ: Alas ! the reception spoke no glow of tenderne^," rejoined Gabrielle; *' and* I awoke in one sad ¡noment from the- past dreams of fond reliance. I saw the misery of mv destiny ; doomed, in a so¬ litude so rutle, ίο the rough converse of a lawless band, in vain î wept the wreck of all my hopes; my tears were laughed £ 5 at^
at, my expostulations ridiculed ; even my reserve, in shrinking from the per¬ severing passion of Leontine, chided. He shadowed my footsteps—he became emboldened, through the approval of one who ought to have shielded me from his pursuit; and not but in his occasional absences from the tower did I ever quit the solitude of my prison-chamber, it was, or, rather, it had indeed been a pri* son, for bars of massy strength secured the casement. în vain 1 questioned for what secret end it had been designed ; Leontine, perhaps, could not, and she who called berseli my mother would not resolve mv doubts. Yet there was a mvs- fery, the/e was a concealment which my heart pined to elucidate; and when, in perambulating the ruin, 1 discovered the veil and mande which sheltered rne in roy flight, when Ì dragged them from the mouldering chest into which they had been thrust, when I displayed them to her view, the palsied sturt, the death- pale
pale visage, augured the sting of hidden «hí i It. in vain î strove to awaken re- pentance, to perpetuate the casual hints of conscience; my entreaties were met with frowns, my arguments silenced by ridicule. But no longer will í linger o\er moments of past danger, of pa^t sufferance; neiïher will ï expatiate upon ih.e horrors with which I sav»· the spoils ti rapine deposited in the sanctuar); the onoortumtv to escane was alone w«i»iing; ami when, in the abser.ee Ы Leuntiui*, and the chief of his follower-, you, benighted and alone, craved the rights of hospitality, I resolved to snatch vou from pending fate, and taxing your humanity and honour, to fly with you from the tower. The prison-chamber I have before described communicated by a sliding pannel to the one destined for you to occupy ; 'twas easy there for me to warn you against security, for me to frighten sleep by awakening doubt and fear. Tiembiing at delay, I awaited but e tí the
the reign of silence to present myself be¬ fore you. Yet, though you promised all that the mo4 fastidious delicacy could require — though your l\\ce, your mien, warranted the unbounded flow of confi¬ dence-— -pride, swellii £ h i ľ h in my lireast, checked the disclosure of my af- nnify to the band—pride instigated the \ow which bound you to silence—and that pride, yielding but to honour, had ihed in the preservation of ib set ret, had not the generous disinterestedness of vour a flection forbid disguise. To ob¬ tain the key of the low postern v> > a ne- cessai y passport to escape ; the enter¬ prise was arduous, yet life u as the stake. Noiseless as death, I ascended the turret- stairs-—I listened in the passage-—! heard the deep breathing of my------- my ------of the dame," hesitating in painful confu¬ sion ; ft and when convinced that she slept, I crept into the chamber—I stole the ke)S from under her pillow. Elated with success, the veil and mantle, which, with
with unknown reverence, í had careful í v treasured, presented a feasible mode of disguise ; to enwrap you within its folds was to ensure your preservation, for, had the dame met you on the threshold, the array, possessing the powers of the basilisk, h'd deprived her of exertion/* " And did you, tojld you prefer my safety to your own ?" questioned Mor¬ taigne. *' Could you, in restoring a stranger to freedom, have bra\ed the л\га1П of incensed power?" u I covet no praise, I boast no merit/' replied Gabrielle. (i My life I knew was safe ; of yours," shuddering, '* I felt not so certain ; but, mank Heaven ! the struggle was spared, and, unsuspected, nna^ailed, we braved the horrors ofthat night—we escaped to tell the story ľ*
CHAP.
жг
СПАР. IV. Free ch not of гс;ъчп, No, nor reflection's pfm'r! Till п.сиюху die, The barb must r.uiUe,
Ail days —— -------Are equat ; To-morrow, ami the next, and each that foibu«, ------------ Undistinguiísh'd roil. Сол cri vt, Vaïn would be the effort to portray the feelings of Corisande, as she listened to the recital of sister Mathilde, as she heard the conviction of a father's dishonour, of a mother's injuries. She spoke not, she dared not trust her¬ self to speak; but when the nun had left her, when she found herself alone, un¬ noted,
noted, unobserved, she yielded to a burst of tears, which relieved the pent-up a- £onv of her bosom. Alas ! what were ί~« ,, her wrongs compared to her angel mo¬ ther's î what her sufferings to a fate so untoward ! Betrayed in a moment οΐ confidence, outraged in the dearest, ten^ derest feelings. Often was she compel· led to murmur father, to recai the tie of consanguinity, as a check to the repre¬ hension rising to her lips. îr was morning ere she ceased to muse oer the weight of a mother's sorrows, ere she ceased to pray for a father's par¬ don—and even then the lapse of care was short, for perturbed and shapeless fancies flitted round lier pillow, fevered startsand frightful dreams poisoning the trance of slumber. ťf Mother of God !" exclaimed Miche¬ line, starting back in dismay; " what white cheeks and what red eves are here ! why, my sweet lady, had you kept vigil at the tomb of St. Honorée herself, you could
could not have displayed a more com¬ plete wreck of beauty/* " 'Tis no matter," sighed Corisande ; " beauty is of no value; we read its in¬ stability in every flower which blows/' 4i Not here, forsooth," rejoined Mi¬ cheline ; ťť for whether the veil shrouds a polished or a wrinkled brow, 'tis of little import; but in the world beauty boasts prodigious claims to favour. For my part, î think none but the old and the ugly should become nuns, for the young and the beautiful have other things to think of/' * f Alasi" said Corisande, %c a convent is a blessed asylum for the unfortunate, a haven of rest to the persecuted," "True," replied Micheline, í{ it shuts out all but privation and heaven. Be¬ sides/' with an arch smile, " it is such a convenient cage for disobedient daugh¬ ters, for they can neither rebel or run away ; it curbs their untoward spirits, and in time teaches them to crave for the
the lesser evil of the two—for who would hesitate Twixt liberty and slavery ï who would cling to death's heads and pe*· nitcntiaries, in lieu of splendor and the world's homage ? who------" (t I would—I do!" interrupted Corr- sande. " The marquis, my father, marks out two paths; the one 1 choose is eter¬ nal seclusion." Micheline crossed her bosom; she rais¬ ed her eyes, in mingled doubt and dismay, to the animated countenance of her voung mistress— " Eternal seclusion !" she repeated. tf Holy martyrs ! when I saw white cheeks and red eyes, I almost fancied myself on the other side ofthat frightful chasm which gapes at the gate of St. Honorée." " 1 would colour no fate but m ν own," observed Corisande. " Dear, faithful Micheline," extending her hand, and try ing to force the smile of seeming con¬ tent, lf í would not pang your feelings., and
and yet I would urge your return to the world. Many claims beckon you from Jience; your father needs your presence^ and your lover------ '* Si Cares not/' interrupted the half-sob¬ bing girl, " whether I find my grave here or in the chasm—-whether it be washed by the tears of the nuns or by the waters of the cataract î No, no, my sweet lady * though Arnaud stood here to urge me, í would not leave you : your choice shall be my choice; and if Heaven wills us to be nuns, Heaven will surely uphold us through the trial." ' f Bnt why accuse Arnaud of indiffer¬ ence ?" questioned Corisande; fr why- impeach the faith of your lover?" " Because," eagerly replied Micheline, her cheeks glowing with mortification and disdain, ťí he has forgotten all his promises, and broken all his vows. When I left the chateau, he was to be at the grate almost as soon as I could give him the meeting ; he was to fly upon the very
\ery wings of Love himself, for the cha¬ teau would be so dull, and every place so changed, that he could not exist in absence; and î believed it all, silly fool í ï believed all he chose to utter—nay, I have looked often at the grate, and fancied — but what will not women fancy?" " True, we are very fanciful and very credulous/* observed Corisande; " but still methinks I can account for the ab¬ sence of your lover/* Micheline did not speak, excepting with her eyes, and those seemed to im¬ plore for brevity. " Surely/' pursued Corisande, pitying the struggles of wounded pride, i( surely the same authority which chains us at St. Honorée, detains Arnaud at the cha- leau." (i If I thought so," said Micheline; and tlicn she paused. i( What then ?'' demanded Corisande. ss Why then," rejoined Micheline, smiling,
smiling, tc I could almost find in my heart to forgive him." " Say not almost, but quite," said Co- risasde ; t( for mercy is Heaven's attri¬ bute, and sweetly does it become our na¬ ture. Besides, how can we plead for¬ giveness, when resisting the prayers of the pleader?" * f If Arnaud was only here to plead," eagerly exclaimed Micheline, " I am sure—" hesitating, blushing, s ' I am sure Arnaud never found me implacable/* te Trust me, he will yet plead his own cause; yes, and he will conquer tooi" resumed Corisande; i{ for with such feel¬ ings, and such a heart, you are but little calculated to become a nun." ff No, the saints guide us !" exclaimed Micheline, ts nor little inclination to make the trial—unless you, dear lady—* but time works strange changes, and my life on it, if, before six months of your noviciate be passed, you crave not the alternative
alternative which my lord marquis of¬ fers/' " First shall I crave my grave," thought Corisande, but she suffered her attend¬ ant to depart without giving words to her feelings. " I wish/' said sister Mathilde, mark¬ ing with regret the devastating efiect of care, íť I had withheld the communica¬ tion \ou sought, for instead of pro¬ moting, it has totally dethroned tranquil- litv." " You are very kind, sister," replied Corisande, struggling to repress the tears which trembled in her eyes. u In truth," pursued the nun, " it has defeated the intention ; for 1 told it to reconcile seclusion, to show how little an intercourse with the world is to be coveted— I told it in the hope ι ha t com* parison might soften present trials, might teach vou to estimate the blessings which stili woo acceptance/' **' It has—it doe^ teach me to bless my own
own destiny," said Corisande ; tr it teaches me to look with anxious hope to the mo¬ ment of inauguration, to grasp the veil of profession, as the only surety to peace. But ah, sister ! to leave a mother so trammelled, so betrayed, to condemn a —a------" father, she would have uttered, but duty repelled the sentence on her lips, and with a shuddering sigh she con¬ cluded—" Had it been any other perse¬ cutor------" " Upon that subject we must not speak, we must not rest," observed the pitying Mathilde ; " to exculpate is im¬ possible—nay, to palliate, a violation to feelings Be our prayers then more for the injurer than for the injured ; for however the heart may bleed at human wrongs, reflection, reason tells us the aggressor claims the Christian's pity."
CHAP,
CHAP. V. Aü my hopes, my soul н thine ! T lhou Lik'st υρ ev'ry portion of my iieart, Лги! itere, to de.ith, I swear theo evurL.stmg truth ! SlilKI.F.r. Τ г was on the morning previous to the count de Mortaigne's intended departure from the chateau, that, fraught with love, he repaired to the cottage. He found Gabrielle alone, in the little parlour; the moment was auspicious, for not the ac¬ knowledged humiliation of her descent, not her mysterious league with the bri¬ gands of the mountains, had weakened his reliance, had varied his resolves. He beheld her lovely as heaven's angels, he believed her piue as vestal saints; the acme
acme of this world's joy л*п<1 to claim her as his bride—was, spite of a father's am¬ bition, clandestinely to espouse her. Gabrielle was agitated; she dared not raise her eyes to the face of her lover; she dared not, even by a glance, ques¬ tion his appreciation of her story ; and when asai n he besought her in secret to become his own, her features, from the sadness ôf despondence, beamed ^vith the smile of bliss ; it was bliss in the certain¬ ty of unchanged love, in the assurance of undying confidence. Yet, though grateful for lhe unbroken reign of in¬ fluence, she felt not her resolution fal¬ ter—she listened, but yielded not to 1ш arguments. In vain he pleaded the force of pas¬ sion—in vain he mourned the pang of absence ; her courage shrunk before the pending rage of the marquis—her spirits were too weak to dare a fathers curse· " 'Tis evident/' exclaimed the disap¬ pointed Mortaigne, ei that compassion has
has been mistaken for love ! Cruel Ga¬ brielle ! you have deceived yourself and me ; lose could not thus coldly argue ; the mere preference of esteem has been magnified, and the heart------" " Forbear, forbear!" interrupted Ga¬ brielle, " nor load on this heart the hea¬ vy weight of your reproaches ! Is the force #f love to be judged by its wild* ness ? is it inimical to duty, to pru¬ dence, to common reason ? Think of the mighty distance fate has placed be· tween us—think of my unallied, my friendless, portionless destiny, aud then tell me whether it is not true love which prefers your honour to my own?" Mortaigne was softened, was subdued; every flash of anger vanished—" Dear¬ est, dearest Gabrielle, forgive my seem¬ ing doubts Î" he implored. <r Can such tendernes«, can such heroism inhabit the same breast ? yet would ϊ subvert your prejudices, yet would I convict vour reason. Mistaken Gabrielle ! duty war- sou nr. г rants
rents'nøt the sacrifice ¿f peace; Hufy may be despotic, bttt it owns a limita· tion/' " So also should love/* observed Ga¬ brielle ; i( it may steal, it may tyrannize e'er the senses, but the actions should rise superior to its influence." %( Im possill с t " said Mortaigne; " ac¬ tion is amenade to impulse, and impulse springs from the heart/* Gabrielle shook her head. ri Your fears are all erroneous," ea* gerly pursued the count; " for how¬ ever pride might interpose to part us, the possibility once passed, nature would resume her sway, h is from your hands then that I crave for peace ; disappoint not my expectations ; be mine, and the pang of sufferance is passed ; be mine., and misery censes to threaten !" " Alas !" sighed Gabrielle, " my heart presages otherwise. Inclination, in de¬ fiance of duty, leads not to peace. Bound by every bond of probity and honour,
îforîöitr, none other can possess .my affec¬ tions, none other shall possess my hand ; go then, attend a father's summons ; go, and be satisfied with the.confession.thai you are dear to me, that your image can never be effaced ; go/* straggling against the yielding softness of her feelings, f( nor snatch from weakness what reason must withhold." tr Never P' exclaimed Mortaigne, em¬ phatically ; " neve** will I lose sight of my treasure, until placed beyond the power of Ые to wresrt it from me; never will I attend a father's summons until I secure my bride. Gabrielle, if you in¬ deed love me, banish these idle scruples —seize, secure the opportunity which beckons on to bliss ! This night let the sacred minister of Heaven sanctify vows beyond the malice of fortune tø circum¬ vent." " No, no/' timidly murmured Gabri* elle, bending her iblue eyes to < the ground; " urgerne no longer, Ie#t, ia f 2 madly
madly yielding to the blind guide of af¬ fection, I become fallen in my own es¬ teem-—I forfeit all claim to respect from you. Farewell, my lord !" extending her hand ; " this honr let us part. The struggle once over, the influence of reason once restored, you, even you, will second the resolve!" Mortaigne gazed on her in silent doubt ; he traced no indecision, no one symptom of weakness; no tear trembled in her eye, no sigh heaved 4ier bosom ; she stood as »though superior to feeling, as though eager to impress an example of submission. But short was the sway of fortitude, perishable the power of self-command ! Foolish jGahri eil el to have fled was alone to have secured the reign of self-con¬ quest; for when „Mortaigne, in broken accents, faltered— i( Adieu, adieu, Gabri- eltfc! in «distance, in death, my heart will .elf ave· to you, will treasure you its wor¬ shipped idol !" she averted her face, she
she covered it with her spread hands; she could not speak, neither could she re· strain the rising sobs of anguish which al¬ most burst her bosom. ,( Why, why must we part ?" exclaim¬ ed Mortaigne, snatching her with impas¬ sioned fervour to his heart. " Think of my love, think of my claims." Gabrielle withdrew her hand ; she glanced on him with reproof, but it was the reproof of an instant; softness, ten¬ derness returned ; a rosy blush mantled her cheeks, as the dangerous, the lenient sentiments of mercy stole into her bosom. " Save me !" implored the count, catching the radiant beam, and sinking at. her feet. " Drive me hence, and de¬ spair becomes my portion ! one single effort, and eternal gratitude be mine !" " Name it/' whispered Gabrielle, scarce conscious of what she uttered. " Heaven's sanction to our vows '"ar¬ dently replied Mortaigne, " Angel of purity and truth, give me but Ihe right г 3 of
of lawful protection* and m'teery in anj» other form will .be powerless-!" Lady, gentle lady, scofľ not at the yielding weakness of my heroine; re- cal the kilov4n blandishments of treache¬ rous love, and then answer, whether it were human nature to have resisted the double pleadings of her own heart and of her lover ? Gabrielle, subdued, panting, almost breathless, yielded to the guidance of Mortaigne, listened to his arrangements, and, strengthened by the approval of the dame, ere they parted, promised to meel him at sunset, in the lone chapel of an adjoining hermitage. Swift passed the flying hours, quick approached the moment of assignation ; Gabrielles heart felt to die in her bosom ; in vain the dame urged courage, in vain she called fbr resolution. A thousand anxieties, a thousand doubts pressed upon her spirits, and filled her with fear and* dread; her judgment warred against her promise;
promise; her promise, in every point of %iew, threatened to entangle her midst the* snares and labyrinths of worldly ills. Tbe dreaded frown oft the marquis hung in thunder over ber head, and the killing reproach of merited selfish net* rifled eve>- ry spring of hope. She food at the window, her arms folded, her eyes watcb» ing the parting beams of brightness; and not till the west glowed with a. last re* flection, did she submit herself to the guidance of the dame; then she shrunk beneath the deep folds of her veil; then, clinging to her arm for support, she passed the garden's boundary. For a moment she paused at the grave of the stranger; bhe recalled the written trains* cript of her sorrows; she shuddered, for she felt that she too was plunging iftto a sea of woe—that she too was arrøing against her peace Ле giant stride of power. She sobbed,, but the dame hur¬ ried h*r forward. r 4 « Tear»
" Tears become not a bride/' she said, and then she herself caught the infection of sadness, for the wild and steep path up which they toiled had often been tra¬ versed by Louis ; the little hermitage, al¬ ready in view, had been to him a beacon of^pose, " Poor boy !" she murmur¬ ed ; " haíLjather Eustache continued the "■"«.4 inmate of yon little dwelling, you had not played truant." " Why should father Eustache have staid nis footsteps?*' asked Gabrielle. " Because," replied the dame, " father Eustache would have gleaned the secret of his woes; and father Eustache wouid have impressed the virtue of submission: but Heaven's will be done ! and Louis, like yourself, may live to triumph over treachery and wrong. The orphan's cause is sure to be redressed, and perse¬ cution falis with iron force upon the head of him who would aggrieve/' "What mean you í" questioned G<s- briellej
brielle, her thoughts roused even from the contemplation of her approaching union. " No matter," said the dame, hesitat¬ ing. if See, my lord the count ap¬ proaches;" and the next moment, bound¬ ing with an agile step, beheld him at their side. ff Ail is ready," he whispered, drawing the trembling hand of Gabrielle through his arm ; and gently chiding her delay, he led her towards the chapel. Gabrielle could not speak; she clung for support to her affianced bridegrouir«; and not even the raptures of love, not even the flow of gratitude, could chase away the gloom of sad forebodance. She entered the little chapel—she be* held the officiating priest ; Mortaigne besought exertion, he led her to the step of the altar, and, in a few flirting mo¬ ments, the badge, glittering on her fin¬ ger, confirmed the power to separate passed, f 5 But,
But, alas! with the necessity, alike va¬ nished the impulse of courage ; Gabri¬ elle scarce heard the gratulations of her hostess; the crimson flush of her cheek faded to the lily's paleness ; her head sank upon the shoulder of her lover, and every power, of motion appeared suspen¬ ded. Long was it, ere, conscious of the transports of alarmed, of agitated affec¬ tion, she appeased, by a smile, the almost frantic agony of Mortaigne ; and longer still, ere, struggling for freedom, she withdrew herself from his supporting sľ mš=she besought a return to the cot-
СНЛР.
CHAP. VI. J i/\i u\ with t.* V« h'» ir íit\:i), Лий u^'-e th' ui.ti'iarued hto.rt a pr^v 'io cì.i'cs tluit ^eaco cle^tiuy. Ог.£\;г,11, Gabrielle sobbed, as watching theretrea» ling steps of the count, she marked hh pause on the verge of the adjoining copse; she traced his handkerchief wav¬ ing the parting signal on the air. " Adieu? adieu V' she murmured, clins'ins' in * О ¡ГУ ìickening despondence to the casement. ik Father of my heart, new-sworn pro¬ iector of my destiny, adieu Ï" Her arms were folded upon her bosoms her eyes were fixed upon the path he had trod ; and though the orient gems of night sparkled 'neath the rays of a new* * 4 G risen
risen sun, though creation, catching the saffron burnish, glowed with redun¬ dant splendor, still content, the seat of cheerfulness, had fled ; and Gabrielle, dead to the enthusiasm of her former feelings, or rather her enthusiasm im¬ bibing a new colour, owned no sway but one. Musing in melancholy indulgence, she recalled the past, she numbered o'er again the hours of confiding interest— hours registered by the dawning birth of love—hours to which the mind will recur whilst the faculty of thought remains. Quick spun from the airy loom of fancy, the joyous return, the bliss-fraught meeting succeeded ; and then, alas ! a lather's killing frown scowled like a blackened cloud upon the prospect. She shuddered at the wild horrors which ima¬ gination conjured, at the malediction which pended o'er the head of a worship¬ ped husband ; and as a tear fell upon Ihe hallowed badge on her finger, her hea r f
heart shrunk under the conscious pang of self-reproach. "Alas!" she articulated, u had 1 resisted the weak pleadings of my own heart, had I resisted the syren snare of temptation, and fled ere the power to fly was past, I might have smothered the fatal secret of preposses¬ sion in the bosom which gave İt being ; í might, in silent sufferance, have paid the tax of presumption, but the gene¬ rous soul of Mortaigne had been spar¬ ed." The entrance of the dame varied not the cast of her ideas ; she tried to smile at her raiilerv, she tried to credit İver prognostics of a happy reunion, of a speedy return ; but Gabrielle was too much the child of nature to counterfeit what she /eh not, and, spite of every effort, the day wore away in gloom. The unbroken calm of the evening hour lures the mind to contemplation ; and with no other beacon than the indulgence of reflection, did the spiritless bride of the
írom her dwelling. Sise gazed on the blushing refulgence of the heavens, she listened to the gentle rippling of the dista-nt ». iirrent, ч Ле ¡\\ced the nvht-brccze laden with tlie fragt ance of ta housand blossoms ; but her heart lo^t not its weight of sadnem·«, and her »steps, as though involuntary, sought the defile in \ihich rested the form of the stranger. Dead to every impulse of fear, she lost sight of the cottage ; she dared the shadow of o'erhanging crags ; she paused not til! she bent her knee on the lone grave, till the spreading branches of the funereal cypress almost intercept¬ ed the waning light of heaven ; nor till a sigh, deep and distinct, reached her ear, did she dream of the possibility of interruption ; then springing from the grave, wiih timid caution, she gazed around ; then, with quickened breath, with colourless cheeks, did she trace tbe long, dark outline øf a human· form stationed
тгл;\сш:пу, stationed on the verge of the cypress grove. The glance was momentary, for the figure, almost with the velocity of thought, shrunk deeper into the shade. Yet Gabrielle rud seen it ; and though her eves rested on nought save the spot it had occupied, the decepr»ons of vision could not be taxed. Trembling, horror- struck, she fled through the defile, scarce daring to breathe, scarce daring to raise her eyes, lest they should encounter some new cause of terror ; nor did she relax her speed, until she had nearly crossed the plain, until the tluilchcd roof of the cottage presented a beacon of safety ; then the pause was momentary; for as she pressed her hand against her side, as she almost gasped for breath, ihe sound of approaching footsteps broke the stillness. Again her woman's heart died within her, yet the impulse was flight, and with that strength which frequently results from
from terror, she reached the little wicket opening to the garden. Her hand was extended, but she raised not the latch ; the footsteps gained upon her ; she shook the gate, but it yielded not to her exertions ; she turned, she beheld a stranger hastening towards her; fear conjured the hated form of Leontine, and, with a wild shriek, she must have fallen to the earth, had not that stranger sustained her. In vain he whispered protection, in vain he implored courage; Gabriellecould only pant for breath, could only strug¬ gle for freedom ; and when the dame, summoned by her efforts, advanced to «he gate, when, with a shriek almost as wild as her own, she darted forward, she threw her arms around the neck of the stranger, she exclaimed-—" Holy sainis ' it is my boy ! mv own Louis !" her senses entirely fled, and Louis, for Louis it was, con¬ veyed her lifeless into the cottage. It was long ere Gabrielle could thank the kind solicitude of her friends, ere sho
she could smile upon her past terrors, and read in the expressive features of Louis a surety of protection—ere, in answering the thousand questions of the dame, she admitted herself the slave of idle fancy. Louis started at the sound of her voice ; her countenance, her form were familiar ; recollections, vague and shapeless, crouded upon memory, and the arch smile of the dame served not to elucidate his doubts. The tale of past perils was recited to the ear of listening attention ; the cause of his flight was concealed, but the conse¬ quences of his «flight were dwelt on. With Hushed cheek, with eyes sparkling with the martial fire of heroism, did he describe the battles heat, did he ex¬ patiate on the calm courage, on the per¬ severing ardour, on the heroic deeds of Henry, on the dangers, the calamities ot precarious war. The dame shuddered, for her <c mind's eye," dwelt on ihe scene of carnage, on the wide, the blood-stained track
frack of desolation, on the human-misery* ν,ο the devastation of hope, which the most just w,ar entails» on the depopulation of cities^ on the total annihilation of villa¬ ges, on the hydra i r pouring the heavy curse of sufTer^nce. ťí War, horrid war !'* she excUimed ; and quick from the imaged dream of groaning humanity, did she smile at lhe public testimony· of approbation which the courage of the youthful soldier ha4 excited, Louis was too diffident to dwell on his own praise; but spite of the tardiness af evplanation, the inquiries of affection noon gleaned, that in the battle's heat Louis had saved the life of a young nob!c, whose gratitude and friendship had per-* petuated the benefit. (( Heaven bless him !" exclaimed the dame ; " for though iriendship and good ofíkes should flow the spontaneous offerings of gratitude, amongst men the want of gratitude is too frequent to ensure 4 reíur¿)/* %< Methinks
(ζ Methinks yours is the conclusion of prejudice/' said Louis, an чим** to refute the general charge. "Surety, my dear mother, it savours of injustice, to con¬ demn mankind through the defalcation of an individual/* t( Far be it from me f о pass ind işeri» minate censure/' observed the dame ; (t for though in my slender intercourse with the world 1 have seen much selfish« ness and much inhumanity, still I feel assured that virtue, benevolence, and honour, ехЫ more than in idea." * f Virtue, benevolence, honour, cha¬ racterize the actions of my friend," eagerly replied Louis. u if you could only see him, you would indeed say human excellence rs not ideal/* "Ifl could only see him ľ' repeated his mother. " Why may 1 not «ее him ? why may í not express my acknowledge¬ ments ? Should he realise the picture you have sketched, the humbleness of this roof can be no bar to his entrance/* " Though
r * Though this roof were a thousand times more humble, my friend would forget the disparity of birth, of fortune. My friend—*' Louis paused ; a vivid glow suffused his cheek ; he saw the eyes of Gabrielle., of his mother fixed upon him: then, with hesitation, he concluded — " My benefactor knows nought save the name of the province which gave me being ; how then can he seek me in this cottage ?"* ťí Why so much mystery ? why so much disguise ?'* gravely questioned the dame. *' Oh, Louis, Louis ! could you in dis¬ tance blush to own affinity to one------ " " No, never/' interrupted the youth, his whole soul revolting at the bare sus¬ picion ; " never can the conviction of such ingratitude war against my quiet ; never, if í know my heart, can it be dead to nature's claims. It was not pride, my mother," tears of tortured feeling swimming in his eyes, "which resisted the prying inquiries of friend¬ ship ;
*h»p; it was circumstances, strange and imperious J which led me in flight to preserve my serret/* The dame heaved a sigh— " Is it a link of the same inexplicable chain which urged flight from the early scenes of your infancy ?" she inquired* *' Ala% Louis! is every action of your life, from the cradle to the grave, to be cloaked in mystery ?" ** The cradle /" echoed Louis. The dame replied not, though her eyes wandered from the animated features of the vouth, but to rest on their sofiened model. Louis started ; he sprung forward ; hfe grasped her hand— tf The (radie У* he repeated ; " say, what means my mo¬ ther ? what mystery can mark the early dawn of my existence? Born, reared in thiscottage, what hidden tale can shroud a lot so humble ?" For many moments the dame appeared lost in thought, lost to the ea»er scrutiny KJ О * of
of her agitated son. Suddenly turning, she took the hand of Gabrielle, of Louis; she placed them within each other—"The designs of Providence are hid from hu- man eyes," she said solemnly ; tf yet however impervious be its decrees, the solution which develops the fate of one reveals alike the destiny of the other." tf Brother !" murmured Gabrielle, as she felt herself snatched to the bosom of Louis. The dame wept—"Brother—sister í " she articulated. * ( And our mother, our hapless, injured mother r" sobbed Gabrielle. ^ "Slumbers in yon defile," mournfully replied her hostess, " unknown, unmark* ed, save by yon cypress shade which inciters the grass-grown hillock." Palsied was the start of Louis ; his rheeks lost all their colour, his eyes lost all their fire ; his hands were clasped, and long was his whole form ñxed as though the breathing statue of wonder, Terrified
t. Terrified at the seeming suspension of thought Ïind power, the dame threw her arms around his nerk ; sbr* called hun her bclcred bt,y, her own LouN ; she implored him to speak ro her, loudly condemned her unguarded disclosure, and by every endearing, every fender revi¬ sai, sought fo awaken his feelings ; but not till the warm fears of Gabrielle feil upon his hand, not till the voice of novel interest, breathing the name of brother, reached his ear, did he start, as it were, into being; a^d then it was but to arraign the heed ϊ г«-", step of youth, wh»ch had often npproathela mother's grave u ith a sen^iiiVi iVs »| 1ПП billowed. Jn vain the Jave dwelt up<»n the past, in vain sheifcnlled the c.ire with which, even in İn'..ney, he had p kicked each exuberant weed, he ггл! tic eked the humble mound with spring's soft earliest produce ; the Miowdmp, emblem of a ¡short lived ι ace ; the violet, s weer, fiancent аз the breath cf beauîv. Feel- in ^
ing, sensitive feeling was aroused, and a mighty host of known attentions were swallowed in one omission. Again he wept at the oft-told tale of the strangers sufferings, of the stranger's death. With almost breathless earnest¬ ness did he, did Gabrielle, listen to the long-concealed confession of the dame, to her assertion, that in the twin birth of a son and daughter, the stranger had vielded life. " I had been a mother five 0 months, a widow four months, a child¬ less, bereaved being one single week," said the oame, *' when the monk and the ili-fatcd lad v sought shelter in *hh dwelling Was it unnatural to feci mv whole soul yearn towards a little hclpk -ъ orphan, who, in being substituted in t'.e place of my departed Louis, might Le snatched from a doom more wretched ·* The idea was formed in the moment c f dissolving nature; the terror, the fren¬ zied exclamations of the dving stranger, taucht me to surmise a talc of iniu ,,w t Г; i··:
and woe. A hapless, helpless girl might excite compassion, might obtain mercy; but a boy, perhaps the heir of violated rights, might live to avenge a mother's 1>ГОПЦл, ungiu lave ιυ nun uns иип vi retribution/' Louis started, and though the softened tear of filial duty trembled in his eye, yet did his features glow with the thirst, the fire of vengeance. " Yes, to his heart, to the Coward's heart, would I bring home thy injuries, dear sainted mother !" he aspirated ; and then sinking on his knee, and raising his clasped hands to heaven, i( God of omnipotence! teach me, direct me in the search, and no rest shall my eyes feel, no peace shall my life know, until her injured spirit be appeased !" ι " Be your reliance on the wonder¬ working hand of Heaven," said Gabrielle, íf on thato'errulingProvidence, who has thus preserved, has thus mysteriously restored us to each other/* vol. in. *: « True,
fí True, truc, my sister," murmured Louis. et It is not for man, weak, frail, and sinful, to thunder out the doom of condemnation. But your pardon," turn¬ ing to the dame ; " your tender care ne'er left me to lament a mother's loss/' " The thought was scarcely formed ere put in force/* she rejoined ; ίς An¬ nette, distrustful as myself, imbibed the project------" ic Annette !" interrupted Louis ; "does Annette know me the offspring of mys¬ tery and doubt ?" "Yes, Annette warmed you in the shelter of her bosom ; Annette carefully hid you from the presence of the monk ; zealous of her charge, she veiled the rising fears suspicion framed. To con¬ ceal both the infants was impossible: but when, on the return of the monk, ire- ported the birth of a helpless girl, î peti¬ tioned, feelingly petitioned to retain—to nurse her—to lighten a mother's loss. The monk promised all I required· Full well vou
lie subtly stole the infant, and by a plea unquestionable, midst the damp shadows of night withdrew her from my care." " Could you recognise the features of that monk ?" asked Louis, after a pause of thought ; " could vou recai the sound of his voice ? could vou Tetraee his figure r <( Shrinking within the shelter of his cowl, he seemed as though he dared not face the glare of day," said the dame. £t The saints pardon if I wrong him, but when the eye eludes the eye of scrutiny, methinks the inward actions stamp the shame. The monk, if monk he was------" "Why should you doubt it ?" ques¬ tioned Gabrielle. " Because 1 would fain believe, I would fain hope," she replied, " that Heaven's sworn servants are free from subterfuge, much less the charge of treachery and falsehood." с % « Dost
" Dost think," asked Louis, " that man doffs his nature with his habit ?" "No," rejoined the dame, if but man surely curbs his nature, when he assumes the habit of religion· The cowl and scapular stamp not the man of God; it is the chastened heart, the humble spirit, the actions uncorrupt, which reap the harvest of a life well spent/'
CHAP.
3=E
CHAP. VII. lícíiv*n fusi, íaugjit letters for some wretch's aid, Some banibh'd luver, or some captive maid : They live, they speak, they breathe what love inspires^ Warm from the soul, and faithful to its fires.
Speed the soft intercourse from soul to soul, Ami waft a sigh from Indus to the Pole. Popje. Far be it from me to sift the motives of a lady's actions, but whether it was from accident, or whether it was from design, Corisande never quitted the gloomy walls of St. Honorée without seeking the terrace boundary of the garden—without pausing on the spot where her ears had last caught the float¬ ing harmony of the boat-house poet. с 3 Perhaps
Perhaps it was to ruminate on her absent home; perhaps to recai the cherished image of her beloved mother; but why then did she seek the terrace ?—why pause, why sigb, as she trod the spot from beneath which the sounds had arisen ? ît could not have been fancy, because fancy is shapeless and unconnected ; it must have been the boat-house poet and as such, surely the enigma is resolv¬ ed in love : no wonder then that her hatred to the duke de Briançon redou¬ bled, that the melancholy gloom of her cloister became less irksome. She dreamt not of pity from the marquis; how could she, knowing the actions of his youth ? and yet she tried to forget those actions; she tried to remember him but as her father; she tried to expunge the wrongs of her mother— to palliate rhe breach of confidence—the breach of honour. Weak, unavailing effort ! Alas! the breathing: monument before her eves—- the heart-rived, heart-broken father Fu- stadie^
stäche, defied the possibility ; he lived the wreck of violated hope, of murdered, martyred feeling. Poor Corisande ! though prone to duty, though sensitive to the claims of filial obedience, how could she acquit ? and not acquitting, how could she honour ? Such were the painful struggles of her mind, when a messenger arrived from the chateau, when unfolding the pac¬ ket conveyed, she recognised the hand¬ writing of the marquis, of the mar¬ cinone s, of the*count de Mortaigne. Quick was the letter of her mother pressed to her lips; quick did the letter of her father chase the colour from her cheeks : her brother too had not forgot¬ ten her, and peace was in the idea. How differently worded were these documents of remembrance ! " Have you, in your holy prison, learnt the duty of a daughter ?" wrote the mar¬ quis. " Have you learnt thu„ nature and that custom authorize unqualified g 4 submission ?
submission ? Have you learnt to study my pleasure—to yield yourself to my guidance ? Corisande, you know the purchase of favour; you know the pass to freedom. The duke de Briançon, even now, is content to receive you at my hands—is content to pardon past re¬ sistance—to forget past folly. Remem¬ ber, every joy which splendor, which the world can offer, courts your accept¬ ance; remember your rejection is pu- Bished by privation and solitude. Ov\ one hand, the mother who gave you be- ins wooes vour return; on the other, an unsocial cell becomes your perpetual inheritance, severed from every endear¬ ing tie. banished from every relative connexion. Be advised ; curb the flights of headstrong passion, and return to fa¬ vour and to reason." Corisande read the letter, and her re- '.olution was unimpaired. It spoke not to the heart; it spoke not to the fecl- 4ii "s: she read it without tears, for iz conveyed
conveyed not one proof of lingering affection ; no, the same unbending se¬ verity remained, the same monopolized right of imperative authority. She was to be an automaton in the hands of power ; she was to return to the world, but by the sacrifice of every inward feel¬ ing ; and to swear obedience to a being vùiom she despised—a being whose sim¬ ple acceptation of her hand, upon sud* ternis, was in itself an obstacle which honour and delicacy c ould never sur¬ mount. ťt Thank Heaven ! there is one alternative," she murmured, as she threw it abide—as she sought comfort in the letter of the marchioness. Affection spoke in every turn, anxiety glowed in every line : she pathetically deplored the existing separation, but she sought not to weaken resolution, neither did she picture her own woes, to sap feeling, or selinidy sway indecision. She dwelt up¬ on her own pursuits, u tion her own so¬ litary rambles, upon every local charm g 5 w hieb
which is dear to the heart of interest. The count de Mortaigne was at the cha¬ teau, but the count de Mortaigne was to speak for himself; and then followed a thousand cautions for the preservation of health—for the preservai ion of spirits, She committed her to the chanre of the о friend of her youth ; she besought Co¬ risande to love the sisu r Mathilde, and each night to imprint upon her cheek that kiss of peace which nature had de¬ igned for her» ťí Ah ! would that I could claim it î would f hat í could re¬ turn it !** wrote the mart hîoness; ** but m this life the heart и assied by man v trials, and thorns are indiscriminately scattered amid its flowers. Weep not for me, mv darling chiï.1 ; halí this worlds blessing is with me, and mar«\ ähs t are deprived of ail- 1 can talk ol vou to vour brother—1 can pour into his breast the anxieties of mme —1 can hear him recount a thousand specimens of vour goodness, and mourn with hi*n
the fìat which withholds that goodness from us. We have together tried to soften the harsh decree of the marquis, nor do I despair of Nature's yet asserting her empire; Lut aï present, my Cori¬ sande, we mtr>t be patient, for even a visit from уоиг brother is forbidden. Alas! vour father has been unaccustom¬ ed to opposition, and man io\es п.л to have his pretogative questioned. ile thought he had but to breathe the wish, and to see it gratified ; he dreamt not of resistance from a spirit meek and gentle as vour own. Sometimes Mortaigne ralLs of fh ing by stealth to St. Honorée, but this do I peremptorily resist ; 1 would uphold my children in aíi which my heart can approve, but not for their seilbh gratification would í assist in de- cuvine their lather; for, however the oue may be accused of severity, it sanc¬ tion^ not the lack of obedience ia the other. Oh, no I nothing remains for us buf patience; it is the best balm which <.; t> reason
reason can administer. Write to me» my beloved girl: tell me all that you think, all that von do ; tell me the hours appropriated to study, to conver¬ sation, to exercise; for I know each corner of St. Honorée ; I can accompany you in my mimi's eye through every in¬ tricate winding; yes, and upon the ter¬ race, I can hear with vou the distant roar of the cataract—-1 can watch with vou the last glimpse of the setting sun, as it drops behind the mountains. Ah, my child! at the same hour, at the same moment, mav we watch the same lumi- "narv — mav we think of each other ! The reflection is melancholy, but it is sooth¬ ing. Corisande, daughter of my heart, think of your mother when the sun sinks behind tbe mountain !" " Think of von, my mother!" ex- 4'Uitned Corisande, pressing the precious paper fo her lip. ; ; " yes, 1 will think of •yon, whether the sun illumines this \4Qad, or whether it be veiled in dark' UCbS,
ness. I will—I do think of you ; for is not your affection—your kindness, as the sun of my life ?—is not your appro¬ bation—your approval, as the cheering ray of my happiness ?" Chasing away the tears which still trem¬ bled in hereves 7 she broke the seal of the count de Mortaigne's letter; for though the marchioness spoke of his return, spoke of his regret at her absence, and of his brotherly regard, yet she named not his friend D'Avignon, and Corisande felt an interest in the fortunes of D'Avignon which gratitude had feelingly excited. Mortaigne did speak of D'Avignon, but it was only to lament the iLssiery which marked all his actions—to deplore the unguessed-at motive which had wiih- drawn him beyond the possibility of dis¬ covery, lie dwelt upon the letter which the youth had penned the night pre* vious to his departure, then upon his own unavailing researches, concluding witb
with his unshaken confidence in the ho¬ nour and rectitude of his friend. " Can it be pride," thought Cori¬ sande, ' c which spurns imagined obli¬ gation ? Oh, no!" checking the bare suggestion, " it cannot be pride/' for false pride lowered the object her fancy had elevated. A thousand conjectures quick crowded upon each other, but all alike closed in the only certainty, that the actions, the motives, of D'Avignon were, like himself, inexplicable. But though Corisande was thus hurried into a new speculation, still her mind felt lightened of a weight of care ; for to know her mother well, to know her cheered by the presence—by the sooth¬ ing attentions of Mortaigne, was a relief to anxiety. Her own difficulties, her own peculiar sorrows, were ever secon¬ dary ; and she sought her pillow with spirits, if not exhilarated, at least placid. Micheline, too, fled through the cor¬ ridor
ridor with a light and airy step ; she breathed the nightly benison in a voice of cheerfulness ; she too felt happy, for Arnaud was the bearer of the packet.
CHAP.
СПЛР. УШ. f hold )ou as a thing ex як it d and a -V У By your reno ш.ее roe ι it, ли лаии.гч., q·.. \ And to Ье taik'd vuth m sU.Lt i.i\, As wnh a snmt. - ч ь ,:^. ir Îf Gabrielle was sad, sad а?з г > was t ht heart of the count de Mortaigne, ;:> ! - journeyed from the chateau, a> hi>e\* lingered o'er the well-known hau nti pÍ love, which distance, min^ľuiíx with tho horizon's limits, gra 4ially e Па с ed hoi a zli but memory-—haunts enriched by liiv magic form of beauty—haunts which the hj meneai hond of bliss had sanctified, had endeared. He sighed, but that sigh was quickly followed by the smile oi rapture *
rapture; for though torn from the hal¬ lowed charm of infant surety, no jealous doubt obscured bright fancy s visions, no idle lurking fear infringed the calm of confidence. Gabrielle his own, ac¬ cepted, pledged beyond the power to separate, what were the frowns of fate itself? what even the threatened thun¬ der of a father's vengeance? sanguine hope clung to the power of nature; and judging by his own forgiv ing heart, he saw his bride acknowledged, blessed, en¬ riched in all that love, fond love, could picture. Еацег to attend the summons of the warquis, or perhaps spurred by the lurk¬ ing wish of quick dismissal, Mortaigne pursued his journey ; nor did he pause, save to give his attendants the necessary cessation of rest, till he reached a small estate of his fathers, near Castelnaudary, the destined point of meeting. There he found the marquis anxiously awaiting bis arrival, his cheek flushed with plea sine,
sure, and his whole features cloaked in the smiles of unusual condescension. The count gazed in amazement ; he returned the warm embrace of wel¬ come ; nor was it long ere the ungra¬ cious errand was revealed ; for scarce had he recovered the languor of fatigue, scarce had he chased away the wild sur¬ mises of his pillow's cogitations, when he was summoned to attend his father. The like smile of conciliation greeted the morning's meeting. The marquis spoke upon indifferent subjects—he walked to the window—he scanned the external landscape—his eye, from the meandcrings of the Aude, rested on the stones of Nor ouse, kt See ! the tradition is almost accom¬ plished/' he observed; (( for if we judge by the nearly-cemented stones, the reign of female modesty is on the eve of annihilation." Mortaigne smiled. íŕ How much is the charming sex be¬ lied !"
lied ľ 4 pursued the marquis ; " for how¬ ever the matchless graces of modesty may fiy the city, it reigns, it triumphs in the calm circle of domestic life !" Gradually he adverted to the joys of marriage—dwelt on the soft reciprocity of interest—on the thousand fairy charms of fond affection. Mortaigne listened; his mind rested on Gabrielle —-his whole soul was en¬ tranced—" Yes, my father," he exclaim¬ ed, " the visions of paradise lurk beneath the picture; marriage, in the willing compact of hearts, is, must be, the type of Heaven's bliss!" " And will you, my son, realize that picture?" eagerly demanded the mar¬ quis; " will you give to my arms beings to perpetuate our name, our honours?*' The count was silent. " Mortaigne," continued the marquis, " will you set your sister, the banished Corisande, a precedent of duty ? will vou gladden the last years of my exis¬ tence
tence with the surety of your felicity?** " Kemember, my father, it must be the willing compact of hearts," said Mor¬ taigne, (f Marriage upon any other basis must be the deadliest curse misfor¬ tune can inflict." * s It shall be the willing compact of hearts/ exclaimed the marquis; " for who can behold the lady Aglaie St. Sau¬ verne and retain their heart's freedom?" " The lady Aglaie St. Sauverne!" re¬ peated the confounded, trembling Mor« taigne; then suddenly recovering luís self-command—" no, no, my lord, »oi to the mere external charm of beauty will my heart pay homage ; it must be assailed by other weapons, else will li elude the snare." <& It will be assailed by every weapon which can fan the hopes of man," re¬ joined the marquis. " The lady Aglaie St. Sauverne, the undoubted heiress oi the vast wealth and honours of her grand- sire, the dukede Fontainebleau, is a pri/c which
which monarchs well might woo. But -we will descant no further on the ima¬ gined forbearance of your nature," check¬ ing the counťs effort to speak ; " see first the little syren ere you defy the snare. To¬ morrow we quit Castelnaudary, to visit, I trust, the daughter of my future hopes/' "Gabrielle! worshipped Gabrielle! 0 exclaimed the agonized Mortaigne, as he locked himself in the solitude of his chamber; "wife of my bosom! trea¬ sured partner of my life ! I will go—I will indulge this vain, weak stretch of politic ambition— í will behold this Aglaie, this golden idol of my father's homage; but no more—thank Heaven, no more—for we are wedded !" This conviction brought comfort to the drooping spirits of the count; he felt the power to separate was past, and any other ill was as a pigmy to a giant. "He may banish me his presence/* he continued, in the exultation of assurance; i( but no, my own Gabrielle, he cannot tear
tear thee from me, for we are wedded.'* Though the feelings of Mortaigne, proudly spurning disguise, would fain have led to open acknowledgment, still reflection, checking the impulse, argued for a more auspicious period, argued that policy should be opposed to policy. The lady Aglaie herself might become the mediator ; for sure if her mind pos¬ sessed the gentle virtues of her sex, the disclosure of confidence could not be be¬ trayed. How from the marquis could he expect clemency—the marquis, already buoyed up with the imagined surety of success, whose highest flights of ambi¬ tion seemed realized, whose mental re¬ veries pictured the heart of the lovely heiress already yielded to the handsome person, the courteous address, of his son —pictured the marriage almost solem* nized—pictured her mighty heritage se¬ cured ! how then would he receive the downfall of his hopes ! how hear the tale of that son's clandestine union ! Mortaigne
Mortaigne shuddered—" But he must Ъеаг it!" he exclaimed; " though not under the aggravating sting of present disappointment/* The night passed in reflection, and the morning dawned in sadness. Mortaigne arose. In the presence of the marquis he struggled with his feelings; yet though he quitted Castelnaudary for the express purpose of visiting another, every pulse at his heart throbbed with the image of Gabrielle. ît was on the evening of the second dav, thaï leaving the little town of Mont- Louis on the leit, the travellers beheld, amidst the wild and picturesque emi¬ nences of the Ρ v renées, the ravs of the setfingsun glittering on the storied panes and Gothic turrets of the castle de Fon¬ tainebleau. The marquis measured with delight the far-extending domain, and even the jaundiced eves of Mortaigne, attracted by the broad bold front of the building, by its jutting towers and mighty battlements,
battlements, yielded the involuntary ho¬ mage of admiration. Yet did a sigh swell his bosom as the carriage rolled o*er the drawbridge, as he beheld the pageantry and state which had ensnared the ambitious hopes of his father. Ser¬ vants in superb liveries crouded the hall through which they passed ; while on every side of the stone-carved passages, the long arcades, and spacious antirooms, the chilling awe of grandeur froze the light charm of sociality. The duke de Fontainebleau rose at the entrance of his guests; cordial was his smile of welcome. The marquis took his oßered hand—Mortaigne bowed in reverence; his respect, his admiration, his homage, became excited, for he be¬ held a form bending beneath the weight of years, a head grey with the frost of that time, which in furrowing, had not robbed his features of their expressive benevolence. Yet at intervals might there be traced a tincture of melancholy absorption,
rdrsorpîion, a shade of tempered sadness, which gave a touching interest to his ve¬ nerable aspect. Sometimes his breast wouid labour with the half heaved sigh •—sometimes his eyes would wander in inanity, as though his mind alone peopled the space. The count felt his whole heart yearn towards him— fek as though in his ear he could deposit the tale of his difficulties, assured to find the double meed of counsel and assi s t n n ce, Hour after hour wore awav, yet the lady Л ghie made not her appearance. The marouis hinted hh refreí > f his feats for her health, and his anxiety for hei wel bre. MorLdgne was sîîenî ; but when the duYe resolved the mvstcrv, bv stating ihnt the lady Agla'e was absent, nor re* turned to the castle till the morrow, he breathed more free —he felt a tempo¬ rary relief from a weight of care· That morrow came—his inquietude returned; scarce could he conceal it in «he presence of the marquis; even the ,%, ' r ·· πι ι» conversaţiei;
conversation of his venerable host allay¬ ed not his anxiety, for every sound he heard threatened the approach of the dreaded heiress of the castle. The day was serene, the heavens cloud¬ less, the cheering sun gilded the verdant peaks of the mountains, and tinged each woody defile with its mellowing splen¬ dor. Tempted by its vivifying rays, the duke de Fontainebleau, accompanied by his guests, descended to the gardens» Shadowed, as though in the cool of evening, by o'erhanging shrubs and towering trees, they reached, by a nar¬ row flight of steps, a spacious terrace, sheltered on one side by the rude growth of ages, on the other open to a rich and varied scene of vast extent and beauty, mountains, woods, water, spreading them- bclvesbeforcthem—heresublimely grand, there softening into cultivation. Mortaigne,withall hisnati ve enthusiasm, «azed on the landscape, gazed till every sensation was lost in admiration, till even tbe
the fearful consciousness of his present difficulties were forgotten. Suddenly he started, for the airy thread of fancy was snapped by an approaching sound; he turned—he beheld a sylph-like form bounding down the terrace. The ga¬ thering breeze impeded not her flight, and though her bonnet had fallen off, vet did she not stop to regain it. A pro¬ fusion of dark and silken hair escaping the fetter of restraint, straved o'er her glowing cheek and ivory forehead. With a Hebe smile she shook the glossy curls back, and regardless of the presence of the strangers, sprung upon the neck of her grandsire. It was the lady Aglaie. Mortaigne thought her beautiful; but, ah! her beauty ri ve t ted not his soul like Ga- bridle's ; her beauty was of a different stamp. All animation, all fire, her black eves emitted not the softened ray, par¬ took not of ihe dovelike languor which nestled in the cerulean crbs of his ab- H 2 sent
sent bride. Gabrielle reigned ti ium pliant ; spíte of the witchery of artless innocence, Gabrielles dominion was om¬ nipotent. ** You deceive yourself, my father/* mused the count, as he marked the mean« in£ smile which relaxed the brow of the ci marquis; fi though she were possessed of tenfold greater charms—though a whole empire were her dower, yet could she be no more to me." In a quick succession of amusements time passed rapidly» for spite of the per¬ severing reserve of the count, the arch i>layfulness of the vour» g Aglaie stole upon his attention. Her manner was, as her person, fascinating, and every move¬ ment of her agile form grace. Adored by her orandsire, as by each member of the household, she reigned a Yitile divi- nity ; yet did she not presume upon her influence, or for one moment forget that dependance with which nature, in com¬ mon, links us to each other. Unconscious of
of the politic designs of the marquis and charmed with the instructive con* verse and elegant address of their new inmate, she sought him with undisguised pleasure, solicitous for his friendship, and jealous of his commendation. Yet it was not love which drew her from her tapestry loom, which swelled in the soft measure of her plaintive la} ; for, ah f her heart had writhed beneath the wound of love's first infliction —her tears had embalmed rhe bier of earlv im¬ pi essien. The blood of a father, of a lover, had alike sprinkled the banner of lienrv of Navarre; and the orphan Aglaie owned no shelter, save a grandsire's care Sometimes her mind would recai the story of past sorrow—sometimes, when unrcstiaincd by the presence of the duke, the inclusion of care would clip the ex¬ uberant flights of native cheerfulness. Such was the innocent author of Mor- t ί i /, n с *ь d İ fíic ulti es —such the woman whom Ins father had destined for his bride '
Sad w r ere his reflections—mournful the *Ые of his feelings; yet did confidence mark his letters to Ga-brrelle—confidence, the best, the surest bond of love. He told her the wild expedient, the ambi- í ¡uus pjojecî of the marquis, the errand tipo n which he had been hurried into P.oussiilon, and the determination he had formed of throwing himself on the hu¬ manity and honour of the lady Aglaie. lie described her as a beino formed to enslave, as one whose disposition and feelings warranted this application to her heart. ťt Yes/' he continued, " she will enter into mv sorrows, she will relie\e my perplexities, she will restore me to the \vife of my bosom, without incuri ing the heavy tax of a father's wrath. With whr.t haMe shall 1 fly to the dear, dear home which shelters my treasure ! yes, my own Gabrielle î for may not misery and bliss be traced from local circum¬ stances? may they not be admitted by- comparison? ï thought mjself unhappy wheii
when í breathed the same air you ir.hale, when by stealth I could fly to you, I could occasionally snatch the balm of your society. Just Heaven ! if I was then unhappy, what am í now—now that I am banished from your presence —now that í am doomed to behold you, but in idea ! Cruel, cruel separation ! my eyes wander towards Provence—my heart cleaves to you, as the parent bird cleaves to its nestling. Almighty love I strange, incomprehensible, indefinable essence of our being ! how, in one mo- ment, dost thou transform our thoughts, our hopes, our natures ! how dost thou curb the free-born mind, binding our every faculty in subjection ! Ah, Gabri¬ elle ! till vou snatched me from the snares «V of death, how tranquil was my exis¬ tence, like an unruffled stream, no men¬ tal struggles checking the calm current of its peace ! 1 beheld your perfections, and the electric thrill of passion stole, rioted in my bosom ; my eyes met yours, и 4 and
mW í teh that I was blessed or undone for ever ' Gabrielle, worshipped idol oí ш) secret homage ! on you am I depen¬ dant for more than life—a sway even stronger than nature controls me—an in¬ fluence more prophetic than the earliest spring of gratitude and habit. The mo¬ ther who gave me being becomes secon¬ dary— the scenes endeared by infant re- membranee valueless; it is your image, my angel bride, which usurps the sove¬ reign dominion—it is the humble spot you inhabit which excludes every other spot in creation." Such were the transcripts which flowed from heart to heart, which lightened the sufîerance of absence ; for where exists a balm so soft, so bliss-fraught, as the balm of confidence, of unrestrained, of candid communication ? where the mi¬ sery which the magic talisman of a letter serves not to lighten ? *' Speeding the intercourse from soul ίο sunî, \V< ťa»« the S'"h from ïndu» to Uu. Pole.
îr was scarcely three days after the dis¬ patch of this letter, that Mortaigne, tra¬ versing one of the matted corridors, felt his whole thoughts lured even from the absent Gabrielle, by the soft touch of a harp: he d »'e w nearer to the opened ilooi from whence the sounds issued—he paused—for the bght vibraiionsgradually swelling into cadence, accompanied a vt/ it e sweet as the fabled svrens of an- с jent могу. Тле mensure was wild, was pensive even to melancholy. scarce utaihit/g, he listened to the following tonnet : — <ť Ĺ\Jui to the heart, (L»ul!'d hy passion'» power, LitM ^ it oť nutuľt. ! düom'd ulike to iiow* Oil ¿ioni the iont of jt y, and oft fro«) woe— Ì J.e cl.aiM, liie bting ul Ые'ь sail Hitting hour. i«i it i 4 . xiixx'L to weld the sure relief, W Кел Sotrov's pang assails the tortur'd breast, When baiubhiijg the calm of tunibient teht, Sht iUtjľ» the undiughi hour m doleful grief. " и 5 'I Utile.
Thine tna — ah, stranie vicissitude í î í rtì-^ The ííciuieJ, achjnjţ, tort uı M thrill uf шу —» The thrill which eise гинысЬюсч nu^ht <it^tro; í|h ^1)ц1и }H>ibOti nil lhe geiiial >pîi»ţ;s u> pleast. strange tickle цн\ î îor üfícn ď>eb a te>u 1л[Ч'еъъ ihe ечкелш^ uf bits'?, of gncî, ut* uwx
The sounds ceased, or rather the ac¬ cents died away in a broken sob. Mor¬ taigne drew nearer; he beheld the in¬ teresting Aglaie despoiled of all her plav ful gaiety ; her arm thrown in list¬ less melancholy over the instrument, her eyes bent in despondence upon the ε roti rid. It was a moment of softened sensibility—-a moment suited to claim the influence of compassion ; for the being who can weep in secret cannot bc deaf to another's woe. He approached her; unheeded he lis¬ tened to the sigh of agonized remem¬ brance; and when she beheld him at her side,
sought fo shrmk from las soiititude; she only inquired for the duke de Fontaine¬ bleau ; and w b.en she found herself м- cure from his observance, üie yieldtd iui a moment to her tears. " Alas "' said Mortaigne, fi ¡(the lady A;*hie is unhappy, where may we seek IťilCitv t " Not on earth/' said Aglaie, mourn- fully ; " for here has every gift its anti¬ dote." M And yet," observed the count, * ť the external source of care seems shallow/* ' Ah, but the internal source is deep I м eagerly rejoined the feeling girl, ts i um an orphan; and though my affection- ate, kind, good grandfather scarce suffers те to feel the loss of parents, still that grandfather, tottering on the very brink of the grave, may be summoned hence, and then will the heart of Aglaie be des* mute/* Mortaigne could not answer—the sup- и Ö pOöiiioil
position was too probable ío be refuted; l' 4 rnţill or,ì\ preset <':e h^n I be Imi î l e*ì in friendlr sjmparhv, ns so ft* ν í e \\lıî ç pered— — '* Myv ьале < Ьо^еп « ->'e'\ I btir^, a\ert the ъгпже uf h.ví í V r i i« r'H^s *u ,,f t furi ed a m le — ť< Γ íe**< : * *> s i ht .;! n* t t.rdiaf/ she ar^ir* ! ? f e 1 * /v;d Uj\í a sovercií-n ijaîm f»^ w<»r '" í ' -rived the count. A„í lie *-i^hed hea^'d·. The thn'!"^ ι ;ч rd of sorrow \ibr.:!rl to tie toir h. ? f e r Ьче îa«' burit ì wHi î\er ГлЬег a* à hrr р«:ге nature shrunk from a second t í cet ion. Had Mortai дне been free to cï*.»!^e, riad he been drawn to the Cabile de Fontainebleau by the irresistible rragic of attraction, this acknowledgment had been death to his hopes ; as it was, the weight of worlds seemed lightened from h ife heart, and every feature glowed v/ith the extatic smile of rapture. He snatched the hand of the amazed girl- - îie
he pressed it with enthusiasm to his lip*. A<£iveJìke the modest sensitive,shrunk ba^ к indignant, offended, her ch« eks tlu^h'cg crimson, her eyes darting liiC. lie dropped on his knee before her-— he tmp ! ored her piiy and her succour. í'ioer-'ih her hand ua> again clasped in ib , for the secret of ho soi.I was im¬ ported ; the ri e, che progress of his pinion —the timid reluctance of Gabii- t lie—the stolen tender vows oí «ccep- t;:.on. A^la:c listened to the praises of hts ah t nt L tide—- she wundutd ai the daring fiants of passion—her coward heart bhruck from the danger; and vet with xt-dou* iuteieot did she espouse tlicc ause —*' \ ou must act the hypo< rite,"she said .'dfer a pause oí thought; "in compil¬ ante with the mandate of the mar<ju!s, V(u» mest woo my favour. Fear not/* ani iy ; '* but Le Lr.tf, that í ma\ reject, th*it 1 тз;. diMui'k, jou heute/* A "ain
Again Mortaigne would have poured forth his gratitude, but the sound of ap¬ proaching voices checked the. effort. Aglaie raised her fìnger to her Yip, in token of silence, and then snatching her harp, her pliant fingers swept the chords to a lively measure.
CHAP.
CHAP. IX. lic, like a nak rd îr-'C, hs shelter gone, To windb and winter &tormb mubt starni csposVi
What una î hei€ ? Gabrielit & counterfeit? What demigod Hath come so near creation? Move tlieme eyco? Or v\ he t her, ndmg on the bails of mint, •Vern they in motion y Here are sever M lips Parted with »гцаг br* at h; so sweet a bar bbould bunder sucn bweet fjietulhj here m her hairs- The pannier plays the spider, and hath woven Λ golden mesh t'tntnp the hearts of meu Faster than tonats ш cobwebs ; but } er eye% í low could Le sec to do therar Ua\mif raude one, .Methmiw» ιί sbould have power to btcai butii ii,^ And it'Me itself unfuruiah'd. ¡ЬлллГ^гь/ wi u How deep is the dejection which marks the features of the duke !" observed Mortaigne, approaching the lady Aglai«\ <^l t s
She started—she tried to smile, even when the pendant tear stole from her eye— çí This is the anniversary of a mourn¬ ful occurrence/' she whispered ; *" f an occurrence which dooms his latter years to woe." Mortatene felt interested, vet he dared not question ; he read in the furrowed cheek of his venerable ho^t the index oí a tragic ston —he saw theswollct: heat t bte wi'h its inward feeling, м»чс oí tlie imperious law of courtesy urjing exer¬ tion—'* Where exists the station ," he mentally asked, "which is plated It- >ond the reach of calamity ?—where the being who feels not the iron pressine of endurance ? Blest with rank, with btate, with power, the proudest potentate:« of the earth strudle with the same infirmi- ties—groan beneath the same prints as assail the houseless mendicant. God of Nature, how perishable is the depen¬ dence of man í —how fallacious his sub¬ lunary joy î Scattered by the breath of ads crie
adverse fortune, his years of past peace become expunged, all, save his sorrows, vanishing as the light visions of his slum¬ ber/' Mortaigne himself caught the infection of sadness, for he felt that happiness İS chimerical; his own experience evincing it a phantom, ever flitting, ever eluding the impatient grasp of possession. His hopes of love were requited—his fearful, anxious doubts were hushed to rest— Ga¬ brielle had vielded to his prayer—had become his bride ; yet he dared not openly claim her ; and her retreat, the haven of his wishes, was, through cruel, through unjust policy, far, far distant. 'ihe rurb of restraint was galling, the worldly projects of the marquis scarcely to he endured. He pined for the mo¬ ment of return-opined to throw off the cloak of disguise—to withdraw the mask t.f hypocrisy. Impatient under ihe prcs- A\r: of worldlv ilk panting to close the politic
politic drama, with those feelings inci¬ dent to human nature, ever craving the molient balm of sympathy, he sought the being to whose breast he had confided the doleful tale of his perplexities. He found her pacing a long arched gallery, lined with the portraits of her ancestors. Aglaie forced a smile at his approach, but that smile speedily yielded to dejec¬ tion ; yet she listened to the murmur of his impatience—she attempted to soften the 4 bitterness of his complaints; and when he called himself the most unfortu¬ nate of human beings, one whom fate itself conspired to persecute, she paused before the full-length picture of a youth¬ ful warrior, articulating— Ci Alas ! vou know not what you say." Mortaigne gazed upon the almost speak - ing canvas; he beheld a countenance blowing in the full bloom of manhood, a form commanding even ίο majesty. From the canvas his eyes wandered in piercing
piercing inquiry to the features of Aglaie. znd from thence thev were attracted to the canvas again» - í have often wished/* said Aglaie, mournfully, "to remove that picture; for when my grandfather visits the gal¬ lery, it ri ves every feeling of his nature." Mortaigne started ; he turned—he be¬ held Aglaie sad, even to melancholy ; her arms folded upjn her bosom, whilst the light, partially admitted, falling on her perfect form, touched it with a soft¬ ness almost celestial—- ft is it from the original of that picture ! am to ц!еап the íť -лоп oí ι 'nlosophv '" a ked the count. " 'ihe fate of the original of that pic¬ ture is stili involved m doubt," replied Aglaie, " It is from the original of von picture," pointing to a striking resem¬ blance of the duke de Fontainebleau, '* that we may trace how little virtue, benevolence, and power, can ensure hap¬ piness/* *' The duke de Fontainebleau ıs .. învie '
model of human excellence ľ' observed the count. " Yet," rejoined Aglaie, with a heavy sigh, " the duke de Fontainebleau is a \ictim to misfortune; for not one night of undisturbed repose has he for years enjoyed. Long blessed with the pros¬ pect of unclouded felicity, the blow which destroyed his hopes fell armed. with double bitterness/' <f But the picture/' urged Mortaigne, turning again to the youthful warrior ; ť * explain, my gentle friend, for strange¬ ly are mv feelings interested in the ε tory." <( The duke cle Fontainebleau," said Aglaie, ŕí had two sons—his heir, the count St. SauvernV pointing to the portrait, " and he who was my father; he had aho under his care a niece, the or¬ phan of a favourite sister ; this niece, in infancy, was affianced to the count, and the heart of the duke was set upon the union. But though my mother was very amiable,
amiable, and very lovely, yet the count knew not the youthful ardour of passion —-his breast was iced beyond the feelings of a brother; and though he objected not to his cousin, his acquiescence was of that negative colour which stamps the simple conformity to duty; he could leave her without a pang, and meet her without rapture ; yet he was content—he saw his father happv, and he fancied himself happy also. Oh, if you could hear the duke recai that era of felicity— d well upon those dreams of bliss—de¬ scribe the excellence, the perfections of that favourite son-—the early specimens of his genius—the matured proofs of his honour!------But 1 digress. The count St. Sauverne, after one of his occasional absences from the castle, returned with spirits depressed, and a mind abstracted : he shrunk from every invitation to mirth; and if he approached his affianced bride, it was with a coldness almost amounting to aversion* Absenting himself from hia family
family circle, his days were passed in so¬ litary rambles, and the hours he stole From rest were devoted to a new study, for soon did the glowing exuberance oi' imagination perpetuate, with the pencil, an image so perfect as could gain birth but in fancy. Many, taany specimens succeeded, but the same matchless fea¬ tures, the same angel-sweetness breathed life in alL" " Soreiy it was love/* observed Nfor- taigne, " which t kıs changed the colour of his destiny/* < e And love of the most fervent, the most románt к natii re," resumed Aglaie ; <f though if the breathing model did exist, well might he worship her in reverence."* Cf Is the copy so very lovely ?" asked the cotnvt. " You shall judge," replied Aglaie, after a pause of thought. *' This very night, when the duke has retired to rest, î will petition Agathe, the old house¬ keeper, to admit us to the suite of apart¬ ments
ments late occupied by my unfortunate uncle* She will tell you what he said, almost how he looked, when last he quit¬ ted the castle." " Then he still exists?" said Mortaigne. €< Heaven knows!" sighed Aglaie. " lie stole from his paternal shelter in a cold stormy night, when rayless darkness and contending elements threatened de¬ struction to adventurous hardihood. It was on the eve of the intended solemni¬ zation of his nuptials, and when the morning dawned, when------But, hush i we are interrupted· Tarry till night, and old Agathe will finish the story/' Never had the presence of the marquis been less welcome than at this juncture; yet he approached with a smiling aspect, for he saw the arm of the lady Aglaie linked within that of his son, and already had fancy decorated her taper finger with the golden pledge of union ; but quick did the magic spell of anticipation fade, for he could trace nought but thought in their
their features—no indication of blushing diffidence, of rapturous exultation™ ** Can love reign in security ?" thought the marquis; ' f can love dwell in calm, in tempered ease? Oh no; Love needs the crimson blush, the stolen glance, the half heaved sigh, to speak his empire." Yet not one of these indica¬ tions could his penetration discover; no listlessness in absence, no joy in ret u rn > no tremblrng, sensitive fear of displea¬ sure, no eager zeal for approval ; Aglaie spoke to Mortaigne as though he were her brother — Mortaigne behaved to Aglaie as though she were his sister Cori¬ sande—" Interest must prevail—ambition must substitute love," mused the mar- quH, moving in silence by their side : " Aglaie acts but at the instigation of her dotard grandfather; Mortaigne knows the obedience of a son. The prize is too mifjhtv to be slighted—the harvest too örf о abundant to be rejected. Mortaigne shall play the lover, even though it be a part ;
part ; Mortaigne shall woo the heiress of de Fontainebleau, even though that heiress be a sublunary alloy to his bliss " Veiling the decisions of his callous heart beneath the specious smile of con¬ ciliation, he joined the hospitable board* he poured forth anew the adulations of flattery—" The lady Aglaie must visit the chateau," said the marquis; " the marchioness, Corisande, will be delight¬ ed with her society/* <s I never leave my grandfather,*' re- pliťd Aglaie, taking the hand of the duke, and looking tenderly in his fare. i( Do you always mean to sav so?" avked de Koussillon. " Is there no be- mg," glancing at Mortaigne, i( who c^n repeal the decision ? f ' 41 No, my lord, no being upon earth/ replied Aglaie; tK my hopes, my happi¬ ness, all centre in this kind parent," and ahe raised the hand she held to her rosy voj. πι. ι í% Matterer ľ'
xt Flatterer!" murmured the duke, af¬ fectionately patting her cheek. The marquis looked grave. " Trust me, lady," he rejoined, " you will yet alter your decision ; youth is the season for caprice, and singleness for change." <ζ Oh no, ϊ shall never change," said the artless girl ; " I shall never, never marry." The marquis bit his lip, the count smiled, while the duke jocosely observed — fr The fortunes of an old man boast seldom such attraction ; but you will change, my sweet girl—you will yet pre¬ fer dependence upon a young one." The nightly meal passed, and the hour of separation ensued ; the marquis and his host retired to their respective apart¬ ments, and Mortaigne, waiting the re¬ appearance of his fair conductor, tarried in the antiroom. She came, attended by Agathe ; Aglaie beckoned
beckoned forwards ; she passed her arm through the counťs, and wrapping her shawl around her, harried to the picture- gallery. Agathe paused before the portrait of her young lord; she held u^tbe light, and a tear trembled in her eye— ľ When ï look at this picture," she exclaimed, *' what a thousand mournful images does it recai ! Alas ! when ï received him a baby in my arms, little did I decipher his mysterious destiny !" " Then yon have lived many years with the diike de Fontainebleau?" said Mortaigne. Agathe dashed away the tear which hung pendant on her cheek—" Yes, my lord, í was born in the family of the duke de Fontainebleau : every good Ì possess is derived from the munificence of the duke de Fontainebleau ; and yet 1 have lived too long, for í have lived to see his happiness wrecked." ,? ' f Say not wrecked, my good dame,' s ¿ - rejoineJ
rejoined Mortaigne; " peace may be disturbed, but happiness cannot be totally wrecked, whilst such a gentle comforter remains," pointing to the lady Aglaie. t( The sole remnant of a noble house," faltered Agathe; and then again gazing on the picture, with a bitter sigh she continued— " Often, in this very gallery, have I seen the dear children sporting in innocent mirth ; and here too, almost in infancy, did the generous nature of the count St. Sauverne display itself; for though my lord Eugene defaced the rich gildings which decorated the picture of his ureat-uncle, the cardinal, the count was charged with tbe offence, and he shrunk not from the penalty; he------" " Do let us proceed/' interrupted Aglaie, shuddering; * e it is so cold and so dreary.** The lord Eugene was the father of Aglaie, and Mortaigne urged not the linishing of the story. Agathe moved forward, yet every о chamber
chamber they entered recalled some che¬ rished anecdote; both the sons of her benefactor were dear, but doubly, doubly dear was the count St. Sauverne ; here he had aided the oppressed, and there he had wept with the broken-hearted— " His nature was all kindness, his breast the seat of compassion, and yet he is gone," murmured Agathe ; " and per¬ haps the hand of strangers^alone smooth¬ ed his pillow—he who was ever so be¬ loved—he who was once so tended." The thought was melancholy; Aglaie wept, for it recalled the death-scene of her father; wounded in the field of slaughter, no pillow save the blood¬ stained earth, no canopy save the azure vault of heaven, whose then had been the office to allay ///5 sufferings? She smothered the suffocating sob, but her fea t u res evinced tlie struggles of her mind. Mortaigne commiserated her feelings; it was evident the loss of one brother had expunged the death of the other—it ι 3 was
was evident the unknown destiny of the count St. Sauverne had drawn every thought from the known grave of the lord E »gene. *' It is many years," said Agathe, break¬ ing the deep pause which had ensued, " since my lord the duke visited this wing of the castle; nay, I seldom steal to it myself, till after the household have retired to rest, for í always return with a heart too desponding to brave the pry¬ ing eye of observation. Though twenty long years have nearly elapsed, not a thing has been moved ; nay, the very chair »pon which he sat when he penned the sad letter we found on his table, re¬ mains as he had placed it. Ah, never shall I forget the day," pursued the dame, " never, never lose sight of the anguish of my lord the duke when he read that letter ! The castle was full of visitors— nought was to be heard but mirth and glee, for my lord the count was on the eve of marriage with his cousin, the lady Aglaie.
Aglaie. He had been absent some weeks, and returned bui íw t o days previous to the intended ceremony. He always be¬ haved with kindness to his cousin, for it was his nature to be kind to every one, yet it was evident he did not love her ; but my lord the duke had set his heart upon the union." Agathe paused ; they had ascended the stairs—they had reached the door of the antichamber: she applied the key to the lock, and Mortaigne, with feelings of strong interest, found himself in the suit of apartments once occupied by the count St. Sauverne. Every thing indeed re¬ mained as he had left it; his books, his flute, lay upon the table—near it the chair upon which he had sat, and the very pen with which he had written the last mournful transcript of his feelings. ťŕ Did he hold forth no promise of re¬ turn ?" asked Mortaigne; (C did he at¬ tempt no explanation of his conduct ?'* ťi Heaven knows," replied Agathe. ι 4 tf From
** From that moment everv sound ui cheerfulness fled, and up to the present hour, has the fate of my lord the count remained a mvsferv/' " Surely the beautiful face my untie has so often sketched, ' said Aglaie, '* though it cannot justify, resolves the mystery." Agathe shook her head— if ît may re solve his flight, but not his silence," she observed ; ťŕ if he lives, nought but dire calamity could have produced neglect to the parent he so tenderly loved. Oh, no, his heart was too good, and his sense of duty too gieaf, to have voluntarily cnfruled the tax of ingratitude: but let the hour of elucidation dawn when it w\ 11, m v Yi^e on it if he jusíiíics not his ac tions/' The dame proceeded ; she threw open the door of an inner chamber; they en¬ tes ed а ыпЛ stud}—she opened an es- «.ru'oire— shť tohl a pencilled sketch tu» m the d rav, ρ ι . Moi tai í?' η e
Moìfaigne stai ted at the first glimpse ; he snatched it fr<vn her hand—he held it to the li^ht—he srazed on it vvifh »mazement, with rapture, for he recog¬ nised the form, the every feature of hh wedded Gabi ielle — u Mvsteiious Пса- ven!" he ejaruhitcd, ' f what nm 1 to think ? whnt------- ■" lie hesitated, for he saw the ev í ì o\ Agbie and the ďmie fi ved iiiqui-sif !v eK upon him ; he Πι. toed something of a.s absent friend —he tried to smotlier h<s emoi.on, but Ьь ham! tr. mbîed^ his coun- teiniice was ibno t convui^cd. 1/»*;ег1ч did he cvunine c*?ch scj^ajate portrait; the 4tuations were ddìcrent, but the face vsas the bãme ; ŕíahtklie glowed m cv ci y line, was pie-eminent in every groupe The count St- Suiveinc vva^ fí-i^oíren. \he Yxds A««l„ic, the dame, alike faded from sl^ht ; *aiuy transported him to the humble sn.vL.uy of h*e> bıİde—fancy conjured the magic «-mile of welcome— ι 5 fane v
fancy thrilled every pulse of his heart with hope and joy. ·* It is midnight/* said Aglaie, as the deep-toned clock reverberated through the castle ; " do let us return." Mortaigne looked reproachfully at her; she had crumbled the fabric of illusion, and nought but blank reality remained.
CHAP.
СПАР. Χ. \ì\ thoughts, all [iihs'uai, ail d. 'lights, \Λ iutcvcr sura tijiT mortal íľ.iiiie, Alî ; re but nuaibteiò <¡t* love, Aiul ťeeil i»'^ tacivi! name ! COlfäHí .r. Tu к little celi οΐ father Eustache, detach¬ ed from the main bodv of the convent. branched (Vom the cloisters leading im¬ mediately to the chapel, it was, as was each dormitory of the sisters, confined ami cheerless, seeming as though t lie pass to heaven lay through privation ; yet was it the boundary of its tenant's earthly hopes ; for there could he reflect upon futurity, upon the immutable de¬ crees of Providence, until the friah of his pa- 1 eventful life appeared almost as the salutary (hidings of mercy, until, ι *> grateful
grateful for the closing calm оГехыепсе, he could bless the hand whence all his sorrows flowed, he could reflect upon the past pangs of woe, and trace them as the soul's gradual weaning from the .snares and delusions of the world. Familiarized by habit to the voice, the presence, the manners of Corisande, he i ould now behold her without startin«»· into madness; he could converse with her, c\cn of her mother, without yield- -nz to an emotion which once tinned t\ery impulse of his being ; he could instruct her through the plentitude of experience, and unfold to her pure and ductile mind the rich store of his own ; he could enlarge upon animate as well .ts inanimate nature ; he could * ť scan the wonders of creation," the globe and all tliat it contains, even from the buzzing insect which culls the blossoms, to man, the boasted lord of all ; for though for л -cars self exiled from every social haunt, though lining in all the* contraction of hermit
hermit solitude, his mind had escaped the jaundice of misanthropv. Crossed in early love, he could still bail with grateful praise the minor b!ess= ings of existence. Had he lived in other ages, father Eustache had been a philo¬ sopher ; as il was, father Eustache was a Christian. Sometimes he would e\ patiate tipon the lLiks which attach us to society, upon the bounden duty which tie us to each oilier; and then, with the impar¬ tiality of true candour would he condemn the hasty impulse which leads to self-im¬ molation, which, under the immediate stìng of disappointment or despair, shapes the decree which impetuosity and false reasoning too often render immut¬ able. Corisande would listen until the gloom of St. Honorée appeared to dee¬ pen, until, divested of enthusiasm, a religious cell promised bare content ; and then, with asi^h, she would artlessly question why he himself had renounced the world ? *' .enounced
(ί I renounced the world," replied the confessor, " because 1 had no relative tie to claim me ; no duty, no single lure to combat 'gainst disappointed hope and blasted reliance. Outraged in love, betrayed in friendship, my feelings were too languid to seek out other claimants : besides," and a passing ti n t dyed hischeek, ť * in the neighbourhood of the chiteau de Roussillon, unknown, unmarked, unsus¬ pected, 1 could glean from the heroic virtues of the unmurmuring Hortense, an example of true forti nule. Slie knew not my proximity, nor did she dica α the tortured unquiet spint which oíten watched her movements. Alas ! 'twas wrong—very ^roug, 1 ' pursued father Eustache, i( but then my mind was not itself: the source of sensibility felt clued up, for tears moistened not the fever of my brain. Afflicted almost beyond the power of endurance, the state of my feelings became incongruous even to m\- sclf ; the once gay charm of my being fled ·
fled ; and that busy boundless imagina¬ tion which had often robbed time of its weight, and often illumined worlds of its own creation, now seemed frozen, dead ίο every possibility of revival. With joy¬ less, rayless indifierence, I traced the seasons' quick succession ; the emerald garb of spring, the dappled hues of summer, the sombre tints of autumn, the cheerless dearth of hoar-cröwned winter: they left me, they found me, insensate, blind, inanimate, incapable of exertion, almost breathing, asit were, in death : nor till the pale rose of peace blushed on the cheek of her I had worship¬ ped,, did I subdue the almost marbled callo¬ sity of my feelings. Then, as the sun gradually dispels the vapours of night, did the sway of reviving reason conn t e- ractdespair; then, with pious fervour, did I address the Author of all good, who in mercy moulded my heart to acquies¬ cence, breathing into it the genial essence of gratitude/' "You
Si You became at peace within, )ои became contented," said Corisande. " I became wiser," replied father Eus¬ tache ; ·* J became submissive ; 1 sought to forget the past, or rather, 1 sought to derive reflection from the immediate objects around me ; í retricted my wan¬ dt ring« ; 1 approached not the groves of de liou^sillon. Convinced thaï m v mind should be open alone to ihe access of new ideas, 1 busied İt ln lhe minute beau¬ ties of creation, till the varied tints ем n of a leaf sometime^ robbed it uf α pang/' i( Occupation is the suicjt road Γη peace/* observed Corisande. fi 1 have heard v\\ mother say a thousand times, 'tis the idle and listless mind which often becomes the prey of guilt." " True, most true/' rejoined the con¬ fessor ; "the human mind requires di¬ versity, requires a multiplii ity of em¬ ployments. Pitiable is the being who repines in plenty, who languishes ip hcahh,
health, who lacking internal resources, feels each new day a burden, and pines beneath the load of blessings Providence assigns/* c< And yet there are many/* exclaimed Corisande, ίζ who seek for happiness in change ; many who------" "Alas!" interrupted the confessor, %t little indeed must he be versed in hu¬ man nature, who seeks happiness in any change but the change of his own disposi¬ tion, but in the control of his own passions, in the subversion of nis own propensities, He who craves it in a worldly sense, fruitlessly wastes the vears of existence, multiplying those griefs he would si ude ίο remove." But though father Eustache struggled against the woes which lay at heart, though he could now watch the splendor of the rUing sun, and hail the vivifying ray ofgladnebs, síillcorrodingcare had relaxed his sinews of theirstrength, and growing weakness forcibly reminded man's shallow hold
hold on life. He felt his steps fast leading to that *' bourne of rest," that universal lapse from labour, that harbour which afflicted virtue craves ; yet persevering in the task of duty, he ministered in the chapel, giving to mental woe the healing balm of absolution. Anticipating the loss of a friend endea¬ red by patient sufferance, Corisande, even ere the sun had set, though she thought of her mother* fled the terrace* fled through the garden to visit the cell of father Eustache, Perhaps it was fancy, but in the chapel a more than usual pale¬ ness seemed to spread itself overhis cheek; his voice, too, seemed to falter, and a general lassitude to prevail. She feared it prophetic, yet she whispered not her dread even f о sister Mathilde ; and with thaï conciliating attention which be¬ guiles even the pang of suiTerance, she stole softly through the cloisters, and tapped at the door of the cell. It was, as I before observed, the hour of
of sunset, and an unclouded brilliant sky robed this earth in splendor. The glow¬ ing tints of burnished gold pierced even within the little cell of father Eustache ; and when Corisande, impatient of delay, softly raising the latch, pushed open the door, she felt as one spell-bound^—as one doubtful whether illusion conjured not the objects before her. It was not the wasted form of the confessor reclin¬ ing on his low bed, it was the youth at his side which quickened the pulsation at her heart, which painted her cheeks with vivid crimson. She started ; she clung to the door, and when the stranger sprung forward, when he bent his knee before her, her head drooped upon her bosom, her cheek faded white as the ν irgin lily oí the vale. Poor Corisande ! The eves of father Eustache were closed İn heavy slumber, yet how could she fly, when her hand was clasped in the almost рл1 ied grasp of the being who had long, xery
very long, coloured her waking, dream¬ ing thoughts—who had reconciled a religious life, in preference to the cold, the joyless compact of an interested union ? How could she fly, when the boat house poet, at her (eet, poured forth his grateful rapture at her presence? "Oh stay ! stay P* he implored, as ti¬ midly she motioned to depart; if stay, lady, and tell me presumption is for¬ given." ** I know of no presumption," faltered Corisande. " I came to visit father Eustache—I—I------ -" " Heaven bless the mission of charity I м interrupted the youth. tť You came to lighten the struggles of declining nature vou came to minister to the wants of martyred health." '* I came unconscious that a friendly watch was already staticned by the couch of the confessor," whispered Corisande ; and then, with a bewitching smile, she stri' ir«· led
struggled to withdraw her hand, conclud¬ ing, fť Father Eustache needs not mv presence." Corisande had reached the door of the cell, and then she paused at the lengthened si^h which burst from the bosom of the stranger. She turned ; she met his eyes fixed upon her, a mingled sensation of tenderness and grief marking their expression ; and when, scarce con¬ scious of what she did, she extended her hand, that expression yielded to the wild, the radiant thrill of joy. Corisande blushed, yet what had caution to do with feelings like hers? 'Tis true, she knew not his name, yet she saw him un¬ happy, she saw him pleading compassion, and compassion was part of her nature. bhe suíľered him to press her hand to his Sips, nor when he breathed the ardent ílíghts of never-dying passion, did she tremble at her own weakness. " When affection, when gratitude led me to tins cell," articulated the youth, 11 holy
( ' holy saints ! how little did I dream, how little did í anticipate a rapture like this f Ladv, spurn not the homage of a captive heart—a heart which e'en in distance—-' f< Lotus," said father Eustache, awaken¬ ing. Corisande snatched away her hand and fled, nor paused even for breath until she reached her own apartment ; then closing the door, she repeated, Louis, and then blushing at her own emotion,she buried her face in her hands. It was long, very long, ere, with any degree of compo¬ sti res, he cotdd recai the past, ere she could muse o'er the recital of sister Ursule ; and even when she recognised Louis, the child of indigence, the pupil of charity, to be the being; of her secret homage, of her undeviating thoughts, not for one single moment did pride take thealarm ; ah no ! she rather pined at that disparity of fortune which had placed her in a station so f r. r above, a station which to her seemed replete with taie 4 *
cares, seemed foreign to enjoyment, f ' Had Heaven doomed me to a lot more humble, a lot more happy," she sighed ; and then she hesitated, for she beheld sister Mathilde, who, un perceived, had entered the chamber, stationed at her side. ζί Whence arises this new source of discontent ?" she earnestly demanded, ffiizinsr on the varving cheek of Corisan- de ; £ί springs it from meekness of spirit? or be it traced to disrelish for monastic gloom ?" Corisande replied not ; her eves sank beneath the nun's, and the swollen sigh of her bosom spoke the wish arising from more than listless i nan İt v. ír Alas !" pursued the sister, trembling for the peace of her young friend, r ' what novel care can sap your quiet ? what hostile threat which waged not hereto¬ fore ?" " No novel care, no novel threat," faltered Corisande. " 1 did but pine for that
that blissful state of mediocritv which owns not the giant tax of form ; un¬ shackled by outward ceremony, I would live for content, not for ambition/' <ť You may live for content/" said the nun, i{ the pass is straight before vou/* ft By becoming a member of St, Ho¬ norée ?" asked the shuddering girl. " Alas ! is it here vou would teach vouth to reap content r'' " I was young when î became profess* ed/* rejoined the nun; "I had mingled with the world, yet here did I seek that calm which------" ·' True, sister," interrupted Corisande, r \ou were young, but you—-you," he- si lating. 4 Proceed," said the sister, forcing a languid smile. " I would say/* rejoined Corisande, ' that my peace has not been blighted bv false reliance, that ray heart has not ìyjtn outraged by mistaken hopes ; í would
\s4>utd say that the world teems with promises; how then can your youth— can my youth own a similarity ?** "Our youths certainly boast no simi- iaritv/* thoimhtfullv observed the nun ; (i for I was unlettered in the wiles of dissimulation, von are forewarned." Corisande started—she gazed doubt¬ fully at the mm. ťŕ Oh, no, no, im¬ possible !" she exclaimed, in the warmth id'her feelings, <f a countenance like his cannot veil dissimulation/' "A countenance like his !" repea:cd sister Mathilde. "Alas, mv child ! upon whom have vou placed vour reliance ?" Corisande turned awav her burnin * fare, and not till the nun had thrice urged the inquiry, did she m ипш?** rhe name of Louis, did she acknowledge ihe beloved pupil of father Eustache to be the unconscious cause of her disobe¬ dience. tr The son of a cottager ' the ыт of »ndigence !" exclaimed the sister, guzmg *<>l, ju. к t
in amazement upon the agitated gni, " Know you the abyss upon which you totter ? Hurried away by romantic sentiment, know you not that the mar¬ quis de Roussillon will never tolerate a passion so ignoble ?'* " Alas! 1 have never intruded it up<sm my father/' said Corisande. " Buried within my own bosom, till this day ï guessed not the name of that beinsc whom I have so often and so vainlv strove to forget /* and then she explained how she had repaired to the cell of the con¬ fessor, and how she had there encoun¬ tered Louis. The nun was thoughtful ; she sat with her arms folded upon her bosom, and her eyes bent upon the earth ; suddenly starting, " Has he e*er spoken of love ?" she demanded ; " has he e'er supplicated a clandestine interview ?" " No, never," firmly replied Cori¬ sande. " Think well/' pursued the sister ; " at tha
the chateau, in the boat-house, has he ne'er pleaded compassion ?" " Why should indifference plead com¬ passion ?'' questioned Corisande, in accents of depression. (e Alas í Louis cares not whether I wed the duke de Briançon, or whether I become a sister of St. Honorée." €i If Louis were not indifferent/' asked the nun, " how would you act?" "If !" repeated the artless girl, in the wild thrill of joy ; cc holy saints î if í thought so——·" i( What then ?" interrogated the sister. Corisande hesitated ; her face, her oosom blushed crimson, her heart whis¬ pered— ζζ Then I should be happy !" but she knew not how to give words to her thoughts. il If Louis loved you," resumed the inquisitor, "if, conveying to you the assurance of his love, he wooed you in despite of duty, would you, for his sake, hiywe the misery of a father's curse ?'* к 2 " Ob
tc Oh no i" replied the sobbing giri; " rather would I stay here and die.'' "Child of my hopes ! child of my beloved Hortense !" murmured the nun, ťŕ forgive the probe which anxious friend¬ ship could alone apply ; forgive the doubt which dared impeach your prin¬ ciples. I tremble for your peace, but not for your actions. Dear, dearest Corisande, may de Roussillon learn yet to appreciate the daughter he has so unjustly banished !'* Corisande forced a smile—she chased away her tears, she raised the hand of the mm to her lips. (i Should my father relent," she said, "should he recai me to the world, in my mother I seek a mo¬ il i tress : should he consign me to this sanctuary, you, my mother's earliest friend, will supply her place. Fear not ; the heart which estimates her virtues, the heart which estimates your virtues, must ever be grateful for the charge." But
But though Corisande felt all that she promised, though her inward thoughts were unveiled to the eye of friendship, still love, conjuring the beguiling form of Louis, armed him with double powers. She saw him bending over the couch of infirmity ; she saw him solicitous to ease the pang of sufferance ; and if before lie had been dangerous to her peace, now inuced did he possess a new and irre¬ sistible charm to captivate, a charm which an imagination like hers could not sub\ ert, a blended charm of gratitude and \ irtuc ; and though she struggled to subdue the stealing influence, yet, spite of every effort, did the tale recited by Micheline recur. If she lay in restless wakefulness, it was to muse o'er the hu¬ mane, the heroic exertions of father Eus¬ tache ; if she sank to transient slumber, it was to start aghast at the loud splash with which the heedless truant had been precipitated amid the flood. к 3 СПЛР,
CHAP. XL What ib that vice wLich itili ргслли», WhtK almost every passiun tai}», Which, like a noxious weed, can ¡-poil The fiure&t flowers, :md choke the êuîP Tis slander ! aud, with shaine I bv»n, The vice of human-kind alone. С'<л ¡vx- Montaigne had scarcely snatched an hour's undisturbed repose, when a sum¬ mons from the marquis compelled him to rise. His night had passed in confu¬ ted and agitating conjecture, in vainly seeking to resolve the unknown link which seemed to connect the destiny of Gabrielle with the calamities which had involved the noble heir of de Fontaine¬ bleau. Shapeless and perplexing had bcc.
been his ruminations; his own heart had pierced the labyrinth, his own hopes had acknowledged her the offspring of St. Sauverne; but how explain the fearful strides which, from such a protection, had placed her ihe inmate of a lawless band ? how elucidate the hidden spring of her mysterious story ? ie Ah, were she the declared heiress of de Fontaine¬ bleau," mused the enthusiastic lover, i( she could not be more prized, more dear, more cherished ! Oh, no ! poor is the splendor of princes, when put in competition with affection! rather would I be the inmate of the meanest hovel, biest with the sunshine of prosperous love— rather would I toil in daily labour, cheer¬ ed with the rich harvest of encouraging smiles, than, beneath imperial purple» pine for my kindred heart/ 1 The count lived not in the present day ; he lived ere love had become a jest, and marriage a barter ; he lived when the heart, not interest, swayed the к 4 rule
îrulr of choice; he lived ere the rosy bonds of Hymen were transformed into the goading fetters of restraint. But why seek apology for sentiments which exist¬ ing custom can alone robe in singularity ? the count lived for his own happiness, uot for the gilded gewgaw, ambition. Lager to attend the summons, he has¬ tened to the chamber of his lather ; he found him pacing it with hasty strides, his mind absorbed, and his brow con¬ tracted by a lowering frown, He spoke, but the marquis heeded him not ; and when a second time he asked his pleasure, abruptly pausing, he de¬ manded if he was prepared to wed the hdv Aglaie? Mortaigne started ; for a moment he hesitated ; then, to the repeated demand, said— " Does the lady Aglaie await my da Wiovi ?" i: \ sent for you to answer," sternly rt joined the marquis,'*' not to question/' Mortaigne bowed, -'¡he
u The duke de Fontainebleau," he con¬ tinued/' îsanxioustosecurethe happiness of his granddaughter; he singles you with his approbation ; say, then, are you content toreceivea wifeof my choosing?" if As well might i seek to change the ordinations of fate as to wed the lady Aglaie!" answered the count. '* Her Mgh h for the ôe-àd, not for the living." " If the dead be the only rivals, fear not V' exclaimed the marquis. Ci And \ct, mv lord,° observed Mor¬ taigne, " you, last night, heard a deci* fior, which might check the hopes of the mo t sanguine; you heard------ TJ ** Fool !" muttered the marquis. ?\!ortaignc stai ted ; his cheek flushed crimson—his eye darted fire; yet mo¬ mentary was the gust of passion ; he re¬ membered it was his father, and he curb¬ ed the defiance rising to his lips. " How little do you know the female heait !*' pursued the marquis, smiling in derision, " Persevere, and the conquest к o h
is your own. Strangely capricious, for the mere love of tyranny, women oft belie their own natures. Gifted with external grace, is it for man to sink dis¬ mayed, to yield to the puerile decisions of a pampered girl ? Aglaie knows not her own mind; act you the lover; as¬ sail with flattery and vows—swear that peace hangs upon her nod, that life de¬ pends upon acceptance; tell her your nights are sleepless, and your days un- blest ; tell her------ ■" C( Not to possess the world's wealth would í demean myself to falsehood !"' interrupted the count. fi Aglaie is ami¬ able, but Aglaie inspires not the rapture of passion." The marquis gazed in amazement on his son—" jTTic rapture of passion !" he sarcastically repeated ; fi have you too imbibed the romantic mania, the enthu- riastic refinement of folly which has mar- «* red the fortune of the cloistered Cori¬ sande? Beware, Mortaigne, beware how voa
you encourage a snare so dangerous ! for, by the creating breath of Heaven, î swear---- —" " Hush, hush, my father!" implored the shuddering Mortaigne, " nor uphold the curse because nature moulds not the gentle heart of Aglaie to love/* 4< Spite of lhe fancied witchery of love, Aglaie mav be wooed, may be won/* said the marquis. ** You know my wish,, nay, more, my command ; I care not by what form, but secure you the wealth of de Fontainebleau/' Mortaigne sought the lady Aglaie. In her ear be poured forth all his difficili- úe\ i i om her counsel he claimed relief. She smiled at the politic designs of lhe marquis, she laughed at the scruples of the count, and besought him, for the sake of his absent Gabrielle, to rely up¬ on her discretion, to aid her schemes. Mortaigne felt the imperious necessi¬ ty, felt that, at a moment like the pre¬ sent, to betray his union was to involve к Q the
the innocent cause of his disobedience in misery, perhaps in danger. He knew the violence of his father's passions, and he trembled lest the overthrow of his ambitious projects might be the over¬ throw of humanity. It was not for him¬ self, but for his timid, tender bride, he consented to play the hypocrite, to shield her from every danger, to secure her from every harm. Hope whimpered s future period more propitious for dis¬ closure; circumstances might then sof'en a father's heart, nature might then plead for pardon. Thus situated, to suc a hand ,% e could not accept was no impeachment of honour; it-was not involving other*?, it was only disarming wrath. Aglaie к new him married—Aglaie formed the enterprise — Aglaie had not even the ihreat of displeasure to encounter; she had only to throw herself upon the bo- iom of her grandfather—she had only to whisper her wish, to stamp that wish a law»
VI
In a few days, therefore, did the poli¬ tic offer call forth the Hnal rejection. Aglaie could not be happy, and her art¬ less endearments softened the sincere re* grets of the duke de Fontainebleau. But the marquis de Roussillon could ill dis¬ guise the struggles of mortified pride, oí disappointed ambition. His sordid heart spurned at the refinements of sensibility, and the death of one lover appeared no bar to the acceptation of another. Bit¬ ter!) did he accuse the duke of weakness, of indecision ; but the decree was impe¬ rious, and no appeal could be made, He smothered the rancour of his feel¬ ings, and announced an early day for his de nart ure. Mortaigne heard the appointed period with rapturous delight; he pined to re¬ turn to Provence, to behold again the wife of his election ; yet he hid that de¬ light beneath the bow of mere acquies¬ cence, and he flew to ihe solitude of his chamber, to ponr forth, in a leiter to Ga¬ brielle»
brielle, all that his heart felt in the speedy prospect of a reunion. Fate, weary of persecuting, seemed to smile upon his wishes, every thing con¬ spired to favour, for the marquis pur¬ posed visiting his friend, the duke de Briançon, and the count was to return alone to the chateau. The anticipated morn of departure dawned ; Mortaigne arose with rhe stm ; with eager impatience did he watch its course, as it mounted the heavens, as ie burst upon creation ; but not the fairy imagery of its tints,, not i is aerial combat with the dense vapours of night, not its gradual conquest, its gradual expansion, could soften the sting of impatience, for his thoughts, his whole soul wa& already on the road, was already in the cottage of love. Gabrielle beckoned in distance, and every other claim was forgotten. What was fatigue with such a haven in view ? what past inquietude to the pro¬ mise of such a requital ? With
With feelings of mutual interest, did Mortaigne bid adieu to the duke de Foiv tainebleau and his lovely heiress, and, as before, travelled with the marquis to Castelnaudary ; there they rested for the night, and from thence, on the following morning, did the count alone pursue his journey. Speeding on the light wings of impatience, he tarried not a moment, rest seeming as an insult to his feelings; and when at length he beheld the dis¬ tant turrets of the chateau, when he tra¬ ced the path leading to the wood-embo¬ somed cottage, he felt as doth the half wrecked mariner, when combatting the rough storm, he hails the peering sun as herald of his safety. The appearance of father St. Pierre checked the beguiling wish of first steal¬ ing to the cottage; and Mortaigne, dis- eembling his regret, welcomed his ap¬ proach, and received his congratulations. He traced it not, yet there was a smile of malignai,*
malignant triumph in the features of the monk ; and when the count, alighting, sought the affectionate embrace of his mother, he followed, like the demon of discord,eagerto sap, to banquet on peace. It was iong ere Mortaigne could with draw himself from the presence of the marchioness—ere, stealing from the cha¬ teau, he could taste the bliss of liberty ; nay, even then, when his cheek glowed with fond expectation, when his heart throbbed high with hope and joy, the intrudine ima^e of father St. Pierre^ crosbing his path, was as a new tax upon patience. " Tarry till to-morrow/ 5 said the monk, fi nor iet the sun go down in wrath." t( în wrath, father!—what mean you?** u No matter, my son," replied the confessor; ťí question no further, but to- nidht cross not the mountain. A mo- ther's smile harbours no guile, a mother's Jove is unmixed with treachery" Mortaigne
Mortaigne started ; he gazed inquisi- ti\ely in the face oí the confessor; and though his averted eyes were bent upon the ground, he saw, or fancied he saw, a lurking expression which fired every feeling of his nature—" What am I to infer V' he asked, moving slowly by the side of the monk; " say, father, how am I to resolve the riddle ?" tf The riddle is easily expounded," significantly rejoined the confessor ; " youth is credulous, and the siren lure of beauty too often becomes a quicksand f о reason." " Proceed!" implored the doubtful Mortaigne. " Nay, í have agitated you already/' rejoined the wily father; " but though the zeal of interest never dies, 'tis pos- faihle observation may be misled—'tis pos¬ sible I may have been the dupe of my senses; for though 'twas accident, pure accident which led me to the £rave. though-——" " 'Ih*
" The grave !" interrupted Mortaigne, and grasping the arm of the monk, every vestige of colour vanished. " Let us return to the chateau, my son/' pursued the confessor ; " to-mor¬ row, when you have recovered the fa¬ tigues of your journey, when you are more composed^ we will speak further." ,f No, no, this instant!" exclaimed Mortaigne; u nay, no delay, father; you distract, you madden me ! By Hea¬ ven, y-ou stir not till every jealous doubt is silenced !" u Jealous !" echoed father St. Pierre, with well-assumed surprise; ťf 'tis said with jealousy harbours love ; how then dare I give breath to my suspicions? Re¬ calling the age of weakness, í concluded gallantry alone led you to the cottage; í dreamt not------" " in mercy shape not your dreams !" interrupted the shuddering Mortaigne, 4t but be brief." ** Nay, í have said too much already/' artfully
artfully observed the confessor. ° Had I known the interest existing, I had mould¬ ed my words to better purpose ; but, alas ! the probe is salutary. Often are the concealments of caution misplaced, and youth, slumbering on in vain reli¬ ance, imbibes a headlong passion, which reason might have curbed/' (f Enough of reason!" impatiently ex¬ claimed the count ; " baste, father, and explain the dark meaning of your hints !" " If I could see you calm—if I could see you less agitated—if·------" " I am calm, perfectly calm," inter¬ rupted Mortaigne, with a shudder of hor¬ ror, which palsied his whole frame : " proceed, father; 'tis mistaken mercy, for what evil is half so torturing as sus¬ pense? Come," struggling with his feel¬ ings, " already have we crossed the mountain, already have we reached the defile ; explain ! explain !" *' Yes, and almost advanced to the door
door of the cottage in which a very pretty girl resides," said the monk, in¬ tently fixing his eyes on his compar nion* " Pretty !" reproachfully uttered Mor¬ taigne ; " oh, father, you would call the health-glowing cheeks, the softened fea¬ tures of mere common interest pretty: Gabrielle is beauty's self; her form a model for the sculptor's chisel—her ev es all soul—her look, her smile------ '* " The more her power to harm," in¬ terrupted the monk ; " though why should î deem it harm? happy in the sta¬ tion nature assigned her, she craves no higher fortune/* Mortaigne breathed more freely ; and wb^n the father continued—" Within her cottage walls her humble wishes cen¬ tre," he smiled incredulously, " Why should you doubt it ?" asked the confessor ; " the youth has charms, the maid discernment. The glance of love cannot be misconstrued; eloquent ач
tis nature's self, it needs no interpreta¬ tion ; besides, often have I seen them in the cypress-grove, their arms linked with¬ in each other; often have I heard them— but you are ill, my son," and the tortu¬ rer paused. *' No, no, not ill, father,'* said Mor¬ taigne, gasping, struggling ; " say on— what have vou heard ?'* " I have heard her whisper— ŕ Dearest Louis /" resumed the confessor; u and, more than twice, more than thrice, have 1 seen her raise his hand to her lips; such lips, ied as the crimson-dyed pomegra¬ nate, sweet as the honev of Ilvmethis!" Mortaigne groaned aloud. ( ' Well might the favoured Louis smile upon the siren," he continued, regard¬ less of the almost choking emotion of his auditor; u well might he cling to her for solace ; and when he threw his arm around her waist, and besought her to hide him from recognition—Avhen he said that concealment was the only pre¬ servative
servative of honour, she reclined her head upon his shoulder, and sighed— < Louis, dearest Louis, tarry till to-mor· row; then» if you must go, may Heaven and Heaven's angels gu^d you P' (i Fiend! devil!" muttered Mortaigne. *' Yet stay, stay, father," for the monk sought to draw him back to the chateau ; " be sure ere you condemn," grasping his arm, and looking fiercely in his face; €C think well ere you speak—did you see her rest her head upon his shoulder ? did you see her raise his hand to her lips ì — be sure, be sure, old man ! damn not the fame of innocence; detraction is mur¬ der of the blackest kimi —be sure, bc sure!" *' Am I sure that Heaven is all-perfect r man all-faulty ?" asked the confessor. Mortaigne shuddered; he struck hb clenched fist against his forehead, " Alas, my son/* resumed the father, u how am I to resolve this emotion ? am í to conclude it passion ? or am I to conclude
conclude you snared by the witchery of beauty, and jealous of a rough, unletter¬ ed clown?" Mortaigne started ; every vestige of pride rushed to his cheeks ; he turned towards the chateau, but he spoke not. €t Look at yon painted blossoms," said the confessor, moving by his side, " view them well; they are matchless in colour as in form ; yet the passing breeze will scatter them, and they are gone. Such is beauty, unattended by discretion, un· stored by mental grace. Ah, my son, throw off this thraldom, spurn the artful snares of deception ; leagued with evil, women too often tempt to ruin—wo¬ men ------" €f Father, father," interrupted the count, ' c this reasoning is trite; it suits not a mind lacerated like mine ; bid me rather ------" and then he hesitated, and then, with shuddering agitation, turned <шсе more towards the cottage. ie What !
4t What ! bid you brave temptation ?" artfully rejoined the monk ; íť bid you dare the snare ? Alas, my son, you know not the weakness of human nature ! a smile would unman you, a tear blot away all your resolves ; 'tis in flight, in flight alone you are safe. Temptation may be shunned, but not stemmed ; the heart is treacherous, and wars but foo often with the judgment." " I would but see her once more!" exclaimed Mortaigne; " I would upbraid, then cast her off for ever ! Trust me, fa¬ ther, the mask once dropped, the power to injure fails; my heart is hardened, and not a sea of tears can lure me from my purpose." Father St. Pierre shook his head—" If you will go, if you will brave the con¬ flict," he replied, drawinga folded paper from his pocket, (t brace your purpose by the conviction of perfidy. ín pity, my son, I would have hid it from you ; but
but your determination baffles my re¬ solves, and conscience forbids conceal¬ ment/ 1 Mortaigne snatched the almost annihb lating characters from the confessor ; it was indeed the handwriting of Gabri¬ elle ; yet he paused not for thought—he traced not the malignant smile which re¬ laxed the dark brows of his informer, but, springing within the boundary of the park, he fled along the broad bank of the Rhone, until, piercing the cypress- grove, he found himself at the foot of the stone-steps, winding up the solitary boat- house. Breathless, exhausted, he sank upon the step, he gazed upon the ruffled sur¬ face of the stream ; he shuddered, for the gloom was-profound, and the mournful roar of the waves, breaking against the butments, was drear and comfortless as his own feelings. " Had it pleased Heae Yen !" he exclaimed, tearing open the vol» ш* ι рзр ег ?
paper, u to have visited me with every affliction but this—with loss of friends, with loss of health—nay, with every pri- varion which fate can inflict, which man can endure, í had been resigned, I had been submissive ! But here, where í had garnered up hope, honour, happiness, here to be deceived, here to be betray¬ ed !" Madness was in the reflection ; and scarce had his eyes deciphered— tť Fear not to approach the cottage; the count returns not for three days—nay, even then the hallowed grave may be the point of meeting. Dearest Louis, doubt not my prudence ; your secret shall be my secret, nor shall the heart of Ga¬ brielle e'er betray the trust of confi¬ dence!" than rending the paper intoa thousand pieces, he scattered them in the flood. The last atom had not vanished from stohî when be regretted his intemperate haste—when he reproached the wild sal¬ ly of temper. Ala\,
Alas, poor Mortaigne ! had he drawn she wise conclusion which this sample of unavailing regret ought to have convey¬ ed, how might he have escaped the hea¬ vy tax of self^accusation ! but, hurried away by his feelings, he could believe the aspersions of slander—he could con¬ demn, even where he fondly, madly r loved ! Often thus is youth hurried away by the inconsiderate heat of passion ; often—but I digress. Mortaigne, racked by the struggles of bis mind, is watching the last fragment as it is borne down by the edd] , and the rhapsody of mere reflection must be mis¬ placed. Mortaigne breathed a heavy sigh, but he could not regain the paper; be recalled the dream of love, and the pang of misery became almost too ex¬ quisite for endurance— Ci Gabrielle, per¬ fidious Gabrielle P' he exclaimed, <r I will ieproach, goad thee ! if heart thou hast, J will reach it P' then, impetuous as the h % uncurbed
uncurbed winds, he rushed from the boat- house, and hastening through the park, by an unfrequented path again ascended the mountain.
CHAP.
CHAP. XII. Oh, why should fiite sic pleasure have, Life's dearest bonds untwining ! Or why ьае sweet a flower as love Depend on Fortune's smiling Ì Burns. Corisande, still condemned to her hal¬ lowed prison, pined like a caged bird for freedom—pined to regain the en¬ dearing harbour of maternal confidence, to revisit the boat-house solitude, to ramble amid the sloping ridges of the mountain. Though soothed by the converse oi' sister Mathilde, still St, Honorée became more than irksome; its monotony preyed upon her spirits, its gloom undermined her health; she beheld it as the grave of ·. 3 cheerfulness—
cheerfulness—she hailed it as the sad, the only alternative from irremediable misery » i know not whether the untitled Louis had darkened the veil of profession, but certain it is, Corisande ever recalled the possibility with that death-sick sensation which speaks the stab of peace. Ever panting for coming change, she would linger at the grate, she would strain her eyes to seek some living object, and then return to breathe the full-fraught sigh of disappointment. Was it indeed a messenger she sought ? or was it the well-known form of the graceful pea¬ sant? alas! be it which it would, she saw naught but craggy steeps—she heard nought but the loud rush of waters. о Micheline too caught the infection of inquietude; she became more than restless ihkI perturbed—she became dissatisfied аги! repining. The days were longer at Ы. Honorée, the sun shone with \e v s splendor; Nature herself seemed stag- ».nit and defoimed ; the fruits of the earth
earth were sweeter—nay, the very flowers bloomed more vivid, smelt more fragrant at the chateau—" I wish we had never seen this frightful pile!" exclaimed the energetic girl, echoing the long drawn sigh of her mistress ; u would that St. Honorée had pitched it in a distant pro¬ vince ! Holy martyrs! if í don't often wake in the night, and find my pillow as wet with tears as though it had been dipped in the torrent. Poor lady ! she was resolved no virgin who craved this sanctuary should be tempted in a human form/ 1 " St. Honorée had felt the danger of temptation," observed Corisande; "and tiembling at woman's weakness, knew ihat in e\asion safety could alone be found/' í4 1 hate such safety," eagerly rejoined Micheline : if virtue never tried must be \'utue. Be it rather like gold in the crucible; for true virtue, stemming the fiery ordeal, shines brighter in the test. L * I wonder
ì^wonder what merit you and I can crave, should my lord the marquis doom—" " You are a strange, wild girl !" inter¬ rupted Corisande. ( ' Marry ! but I should crave some merit too," resumed the smiling Miche¬ line; " for query whether the devil, when he tempted St. Honorée, assumed a finer form than father Eusîache's pupii, Louis? Mother of God í he has charms enough to turn the brain of any young nun in Christendom ľ If he was once to urn his sloe-black eyes on me, I should forget Arnaud, and all my promises." 4i On you!" reproachfully uttered Co- is a n de. ** And why not, lady ?" demanded Micheline. '* Louis may be handsome, but Louis is but the son of a peasant." " True/' said Corisande, shuddering, " Louis is the son of a peasant." She hesitated for a moment ; then turning aside her blushing cheek, demanded— " Has Louis ever spoken to you ?" " Ye*,
" Yes, often," replied Micheline ; (í it was but yesterday, at the grate, that he asked me how long this banishment was to continue? and whether my angel-mis¬ tress murmured at her lot ?" " And what did you say ?" questioned the almost breathless Corisande. ft Why, I said that there was but little use to murmur,"replied Micheline, "for that my lord marquis had banished us the chateau, because he had found a lovc- «îitty written on the marble slab in the boat-house; and that you, my lady— ble.vcd Mary ! what is the matter?" for Corisande, pale and trembling, sank powerless upon her chair; "yesterday the same words half-murdered poor Louis; and to-day—'* i( Heed not to-day," interrupted the agitated Corisande; "lam well—quite well—tell me of Louis/* " Alas ! 1 can only tell you that he looked as pale, and trembled-as much, as )ou do now : and when he could speaks ĺ 5 he
TREACHERY. he asked— * Did you not curse the writer of those lines ?' and when 1 told him I believed the writer of those lines to be the chief cause of your disobedience, and that but for him a marriage with the duke de Briançon might have been tole¬ rated, he raised his clasped hands to hea¬ ven, and blessed you with a rapture 1 can never forget," Corisande could not speak, she could only bury her burning face in her bosom, as the unconscious Micheline continued *—·* I told him, besides, that however my lord the marquis might banish you the chateau, he could not banish this stran¬ ger from your thoughts; for that you slept but to dream of him at night, and woke but to think of him in the morn¬ ing; that your cheerfulness was fled, and that the very name of the boat-house would, at any time, paint your cheeks Vith the deepest scarlet." " Holy Heaven !'* articulated the con¬ fused, the distressed, the almost-weeping Corisande,
'Corisande, (( un«r«arded, foolish Miche- line, what have you done ? what have yon said i'' (i Nothing but the truth," said the astonished girl. " But for those stupid, Ilk kless lines, neither you or I, my sweet lady, had been condemned to penance. Louis execrated them as much as 1 did; and he said if it would give us comfort to know it, the heart of the writer was tortured almost to madness. But there, I »old him, he ¡hue knew your heart, my Lcly, fc t that it was made up of sweet- nev=, gentleness, and compassion ; and ihat the bare thought of the handsome strangei'b misery would be a bitter ag¬ gravation of vour own." Coridalide shuddered* " And then he asked," pursued the communicative girl, " what could be done to avert the mischief? and vowed, by every thing holy, he would sacrifice his life to lighten one pang of yours. So I told him nothing but patience coüK: l İS be frie *
befriend us; though, forsooth, if the boat house poet could gair access to your ear, neither you or I would hesitate to üy our cage, for that we were both heart¬ sick of homilies and paternosters ; and that 1 had often heard you, my lady, de¬ spise grandeur, and pine for love, me¬ diocrity, and content. Besides—" tf Enough, enough !" interrupted the tortured Corisande. " Micheline, you have murdered my peace of mind for ever/' " Saint« of mercy ! I murdered your peace of mind!" exclaimed the alarmed girl; " alas! what ails my beloved lady ?" for she beheld Corisande almost writhing beneath this outrage to delicacy ; " do tell me what w T rong I have said, and what I have done?" i( Go, go," faltered the sobbing girl ; * ( vou have betrayed my weakness—you have exposed me where—" she paused —she wept with hysteric violence, " Shall
<ς Shalt I call sister Mathilde ?" asked Micheline. ei Not for the universe/' replied Co¬ risande; is already humbled, I would bury my shame and my grief in my own bosom." ** Oh, no ! not humbled, say not hum¬ bled/'implored the distressed Micheline; íf Louis thinks you the first of created beings, and, I am sure, would die rather than betray his trust." ** Alas ! he must think me lost to de¬ licacy," sobbed Corisande ; u he must think me lost to all the mind of woman ought to cherish ; he must think me dis¬ obedient,ungrateful, a rebel to my father's will, an apostate almost to modesty." u I am sure he thinks very different," said Micheline; "I am sure his whole soul is interested in your happiness, or why did he bid me tax him even to the extent of life to ensure your comfort ? I tell you, lady, if ever the heart of man spoke
spoke in the features, Louis, though the son of a cottager, has dared to raise his thoughts high as the daughter of my lord marquis de Roussillon—nay, and much I mistake if his visits to Sr, Ho¬ norée are not more frequent since you have become its inmate. Gratitude is a very pretty plea, and covers a thousand pretensions; but love sways the whole mind— lo\c leads every sense capti4e." Corisande sighed ; her feelings acqui¬ esced, though she ventured not to sjua*:. " Why did Louis tremble ? and why did he look alternately red nnd whììv. It J when I only hinted your admiration of the boat-house poet ?" said the loqua¬ cious girl. * f Sure as death Louis U jea¬ lous, and hates this boat-house poet with mortal hatred." " Be it so,"said Corisande; "and now, my good girl, leave me ; and when next you encounter Louis, be less explicit, and more respectful ; at least be my name, and the name of my family, sacred." But
But though with thisinjunctionCorisande dismissed her thoughtless attendant, still her mind was ill at ease ; incessantly was she haunted by the remembered flippancy of Micheline —incessantly was the pal¬ pable agitation of Louis recalled— u Alas! how a^ain can I encounter his eve ?" she mused ; " how veil my confusion under the appearance of ignorance ?" Yet though Corisande felt doubtful of her power to disguise, she ceased not to visit the cell of father Eustache; and I will not answer whether she did not some¬ times experience lhe pang of disap¬ pointment, in beholding nought save the form of its venerable tenant : be that as it may, the necessity of conceal¬ ment was not called into action, for Louis neither visited the cell or lingered at the grate. " How destructive are the /lights of ambition!*' thought Corisande, as Ion**· after sunset she tarried in the garden ; £i how rapid its strides—how seductive its
its incitements ! alas í it has poisoned the peace of my mother, and now does it assail my own. Poor Louis ! had he been born otherwise than what he was— but what is lowly merit in the eyes of pride ? what all the virtues, all the boast of human excellence, in competition with wealth, with worldly vain distinc- tions ? holy Heaven I what can í hope* when my father, to enrich himself—" She paused—she shuddered; the wrongs of the confessor crouded upon memory —the violated trust, the outraged feelings of her unsuspecting mother. Again she recalled the story of sister Mathilde, and again it gave place to the impressive form of Louis; his look, his attitude, his voice, all mocked the efforts of compo¬ sure—all softened her to sadness. To escape the observation of the nuns, and more securely to indulge the wild latitude of thought, she had exchanged the conspicuous elevation of the terrace for a low and mossy dingle, shadowed with
with luxuriant foliage, and hemmed, as was the garden from which it branched, by the same high and obtrusive wall. Corisande rested amid the thicket ; the gloom was concordant to her feelings; and as her eyes were fixed on the mossy carpet, as the shadows of night gradually thickened, a refulgent twinkling, like stars amid the sod, became more appa¬ rent. She started ; for a moment she gazed in doubt ; then stooping to exa¬ mine the cause of wonder, discovered the little interloper on her reflections; it was the glow-worm's luminous beacon which had caught her f, ye—which now spoke the strides of night—which waken¬ ed her to the chill of falling dews. She smiled at her own abstraction, aud wrapping her cloak around her, re- fumed to the monastery ; but ere she regained the retirement of her chamber, did the vein of poesy, kindled at the ¿low-worm's magic taper, model the fol¬ lowing üne.'i ;·■-·
Ссш of tliite ìonely solitary bow V, Glitt'ring, a star, amidst these gloomy shades, Light, transient meteor of a flitting hour, Chat41 by the morning's, sun, thy splendor fades* Here do I trace thee ! Kadiaat insects say, Why does thy mystic taper bhine more bright, When night, drear night, obscures the face ofrias, And ebon clouds surmount the gurish light? When darkness wraps around this u nethtr world," Confounding mountain, forefet, rock, and steep; When all alike in blank confibion's hurľd, And natu:e*s dewy tens Lei suéj tloth wcop? Tor then I find thee, fdittYing in the Jpvay, Thy fairy lamp, a beacon to the eve, Or couch'd in moss, thy unobtrusive ray, Fpitume of hie, excitei» tiie ss^h. For, ah! bke thee, see lowly merit shrinks, Befoie piuie's bol J, uuduunted, ¡sha me I ess gare; ï 'ke r liée, bubducd, her iiatUc lustre aiiiks, Like thee she fadei» mad the «orld'j» br'ght bl ¿e
Likt
Like thee, m secret haunts, obscure and wild, Retreating, drooping, she in meekness lives, Waiting in patience, uncomplaining, mild, Till bober eve returning lustre gives. ín thee, soft gem, Humility is blest ; From thee she gleans a monitor to cheer ; Fur when tumaltuoiis pride ib hush'd to rest, Her ravj like thine, burns steady, bright, and clear*
с ПАР.
chap. xm. Jealousy of Jove, -—-Thou eldest of aH passions î Or rather ail in one ! X here invoke thee. Where'er thou'rt thron'd, in air, or earth, or hell, Bring me revenge. Dhyden. Mortaigne brooded o'er the insidious whispers of the monk till every feeling of his soul became jaundiced, till love changed to bitterness, till confidence faded into dire and discordant jealousy. His brow was contracted, his pace irre¬ gular, his arms folded on his breast, his dark eyes bent upon the earth. Care banquetted on his peace ; misery lurked in every outline of his expressive fea¬ tures. Now cursing the name, the very being;
being of Gabrielle-— now swearing for ever to fly the dangerous witchery of her charms—now smiling in the pro>- røised exultation of uttering the anathe¬ ma of reproach and reprobation ; each breath gave rise to some new passion, and each passion ransacked his once gene* rous mind. His whole feelings were in arms, his whole soul as the perturbed tempest which rocks the.earth's founda·* tion. His bride, his worshipped Gabri¬ elle, her in whom he had vested every hope on this side heaven—her whom he had wooed in spite of every bar which ambition, which authority could insti¬ tute—to know her fallen—to see her the polluted slave of a vile passion ! He started ; he shuddered as though a scor-* pion sting had pierced his heart ; to know her lost to innocence, to trace the blush of shame quick gathering oa hercheek! "God, God of nature!" he ejaculated : and as he sprung forward, as he reached the low grave of the stranger, as
as he struck his clenched hand against his forehead, as he raised his eyes at a wild shriek of terror, he beheld the wife he suspected, he beheld Gabrielle, whom he had heard traduced, racked with a thousand shapless fears, unconscious of the nature of his agitation. Gabrielle would have sprung to his bosom, but coldly he repulsed her— coldly he evaded the kiss of love. " Ac¬ cursed, dangerous, beguiling sex !" he muttered. Gabrielle grasped his arm. " What ails my lord ?" she demanded ; « what——" ** Mad ! mad !" interrupted Mor¬ taigne, breaking, from her : his eyes glar¬ ed, his lips quivered, his whole form was convulsed ; memory teemed with the insinuations of the father, andart seemed to blacken every suspected crime. " Blessed saints !" faltered the trem¬ bling girl, clinging to the o^rshadowing cypress. :i But
«'But three weeks wedded," pursued the counts gazing on the wan cheek of the imagined culprit, " but three weeks wedded, and already a chain so galling !" , Gabrielle raised her clasped hands to heaven, her lips motioned to speak, but the power of articulation was fled, for amazement and despair iced every faculty of her nature, "Go, go," resumed Mortaigne; i( it was not me you sought ; go, traitress, warn your lover ; for if he approach this grave, if I catch but the outline of his shadow, he or I become ňt but for its, tenant." " What lover ?" faintly articulated Ga - brielle. " Cruel, mistaken Mortaigne, you are deceived, you are abused." Mortaigne groaned—* f Too fatally am I deceived, too fatally am I abused," he exclaimed ; Si where I most trusted, there am I deceived ; where honour is most vulnerable, there am 1 abused." ťí Explain,"
« Explain/' implored Gabrielle ; " telí me, tell me, as yo« value my senses ; name but the being who has imposed upon your generous nature—who------" " Is it for you to ask ?" interrupted Mortaigne. *' Oh, woman î treacherous, deceitful, damned sex !" Then with an effort at calmness, he continued—"Have you not forgotten every pledged vow of faith and honour ? have you not violated every chaste and holy bond ?" " Never, never, as God shall judge me !" faltered Gabrielle. " Often does the cloak of night deceive our reliance," said Mortaigne ; "often, when Heaven alone seems to witness our misdeeds, does the prying eye of man dive within our secret ; often wakeful, watchful, does he dare to sift with busy persevering scrutiny." Gabrielle folded her arms upon her bosom ; her heart felt swollen to bursting, * et she shed not one single tear. €i The cautions of deceit are often futile/*
futile/' pursued the count, "the politic contrivances of sin shallow. Answer me, Gabrielle; the eye of man has traced your wanderings ; say, have you not stolen from yon cottage ? have you not tarried in this defile ? have you not met——" * f Who ?** demanded Gabrielle, with a start of horror. "A violator—a seducer—an adulterer l rs thundered Mortaigne. Gabrielle heard the accusation, but she heard no more ; her life's blood re¬ ceded; she sank upon the grave, almost as cold, almost as senseless as the form which the sod enveloped. " Lost, irrecoverably lost," sighed Mortaigne, as he raised her from the earth ; and then he turned away his eyes; doubtful of the relenting softness of his own heart. "Father St. Pierre was right," he articulated, venturing one look at ln's fainting bride; " I ought to have fled ; í VOL. Ш« m UlUňZ
must fly, far, far from the possibility of beholding thee/' and his tears streamed upon her marbled cheek. Her hat had fallen off ; her golden locks strayed upon her bosom ; her fore¬ head, white as the cygnet's down, was bared to the dews of heaven. Mortaigne imprinted a kiss upon that forehead, even when he murmured— " So young, so fair, so guilty ;" and then he shuddered, as though an asp had crossed him. <c Saints of mercy ! how from the pinnacle of bliss am í hurled !" and then again he wept, and then with struggling, almost unconscious passion, did he press his lip to her pallid cheek. ** f No, no, 'tis no impeachment of honour ; angels weep for fallen man ; I may gaze upon this form on which my dotage hung —gaze for the last, last time ! Changed is the heart, but not the features. Oh, Gabrielle í had Heaven made thee chaste, not to have reigned the sovereign lord of еаДп,
earth, would I have resigned thee ; but thou art lost, and Í- ----" Gabrielle sighed— Gabrielle fixed her eyes upon him ; instantly did pity vanish. did pride, grief, rage, chase every ves¬ tige of softness; and when Gabrielle mur¬ mured his name, when feebly she extend¬ ed her arms, he shrunk from them, as though dishonour lurked within their circle. fi Oh, leave me to die !" faltered Gabrielle. " Bereft of all the soul holds dear, what—what is life ?" She clung to the cypress tree ; she trembled with almost palsied agitation. Mortaigne answered not ; he sighed, but his purpose was unchanged ; he supported her through the defile, and across the plain ; bur when they approached the cottage, his resolution faltered, yet struggling to quell the raging tide of feeling, he paused for a moment, then iu broken accents articulated, "If you are not past redemption lost, in those tears xi 2 mry
may be traced compunction and remorse Gabrielle started ; she withdrew her arm from his, she answered but by a look : indignation flashed through her swiftly-flowing tears, and enriched with a transient glow the driven snow of her cheek. tť Oh God!" continued the count, raising his clasped hands to heaven, if soften the obduracy ofherhea*4— recaí her to the paths of peace !" He rushed from her—he paused not even at the wild shriek of herdespair —he regained the cypress-grove—he threw himself beneath its shade, his head rest¬ ing on the grave, and his breast labour- ing almost to bursting. The dews of night fell unheeded ; the gathering dark¬ ness was unmarked; a menial fire raged within, and not old ocean's swollen waves could have quenched the flame. A thousand vague schemes distracted his brain ;
brain ; a thousand wild and shapeless projects mocked imagination. Öne mo¬ ment he thought of tearing her from his rival, from the cottage : of dooming her toa living death, of plunging her into all the miseries of inaction, of rayless, cheerless solitude, of transporting her to some religious order, where privation and woe might extract the barb of sin, and awaken the expiating dawn of re¬ pentance. The gradual decline of her beauty, the premature advance of decay, felt a- a peace-offering to his outlawed beirt. lf Then die will deceive no more," he c\c laimcd, víeküng to the momentary rincour of Lts feelings; if ihcic, shut: out from man, will the full perfection oí her charms, like the blossoms of the eleseit, fade and die unseen/' But hb rival—he thought of him, and the picture of revenge was incomplete ; he must hear his groans, he must see htm writhe beneath the pang of death, eie the hope of peace could redawn. m 3 Quick
Quirk succeeded the project of lurking in secret for this imagined rival—of sheathing his sword in the breast of the detested Louis. (t And will that give me peace ?'* thought Mortaigne, re¬ turning to himself, and shuddering at the malignancy of his own heart, " Par¬ don me, Heaven/* he concluded, '*and awaken them both to repentance !"' ile sprung from ihe cold earth, softened ro weeping ; he looked bark upon the cottage ; he saw a light twinkling in the chamber of Gabrielle, She might be ill, tainting, dying with remorse and shame ; but her h ok > alas ! her look of indig¬ nation savoured not of repentance ; that »ook awakened madness, and with an effort of desperation, he fled far beyond t he prospect oí the light which beamed from her casement. The slave of native impetuosity, spurning the aid of mature deliberation, trembling forself-command, even for honour, ina neighbourhood so dangerous; to quit Provence, to drown i emem branec
remembrance in change, appeared the only expedient which promised any thing like success ; and Mortaigne, with aieliance far too sanguine, returned to the chateau. Hiding the aching anguish of his heart beneath assumed composure, he joined the supper-board. He shrunk not even from the piercing eye of father St. Pierre. The marchioness admitted, yet deplored the pi ».uniólo pretence for absence: and leaving a wr.tten explanation of his movements, iu cas- of ihe return of the íiiaiquís the verv next moniing, ere the sun had ς« hied the topv of tlie moun- î.Miii, hehetvl Iiiai far removed from the scene of his dis tppointment-—from thi* 4 ; r rne of his sorrows
m 4 CHAP.
CHAP. XIV. Τΐι\ tili î nor p>i an.'v ii чек!, ike the flouai t tht rot к tfi.il h CS H* LUI itt Uİ tíWftí. ruí i <.t^s\- i^r- ^ 'hť-iMÍ ] Ci v ^ UU Г hí' bl«l&t * l¡5 í .X. PiFF'cuíT is the task f о portray the dis¬ traction, the anguish of the deserted (»abric ile ; poor the powers of language, to describe tbr tumult of her feclmg t í > \%hen she beheld the lord of her aiïtt- t oí s. í lie husband of her earthly hopes'. : * un n'n g hor exfcmlcd ariih, an 1 icctd- « r. wild, ¡ren/\ I a- hci-jidi, beve d the t :'* ль oí her ťľ.íeebíed voice; win n he i,, hu Jf condemned, lost, bai.»o^l í n с Ч it .íl, brmvLed liv ргсч^-е * * ' * tí 1 l^c." slie airi^id.ttcd, as sh^ t ľ. t 1 t,),' ι !i the cotf..gť\ *' ' '* tVi ' h. 'i
heard the voice of his upbraiding, the fiat of separation, and vet 1 live, Holv sJrt-» ! fur what am 1 ordained ?" Mie paused at the garden-gate—bhe h y. r - ы<}п ι r —- he d ash ed a wav the **i criming t e." rs— she ga/ed with aching strı.îTiv c;i;cr ίο taîch one glance тон:
.* i,î >\ . *. i Γιΐ'ο^ u ľ; the y'iK.ıv, .и- \'pi>! ί di *.,η·. e. Imi *·:* ' .ι- χ ¡o¡ ¡, ν«, 't îT'im Lenťuíh tiup· "Ьл- > , - »i-e î. 'iî-bıcc/e murmure* 1 , but ι . !" ί %* *e f > r* îvC ine 1 *^г;м ч1 ». * (' ! ¡ил] f liíerŕd G'iMieilc, *· ¡ 'I. '; i ι l l· . ' 'v 'iî d**rp.»ir. *' L WÎio .'.,*.'* л '''î'p* . i' î'c ::ï idx'ï : .*— L w "·.»> • <\v ; г ; ' f v *Лг*% j.\'\l\l î·» ÎÎK4, V. ''' ' ' Γι ît f ir oí мчи» .МОГ, **:i İ ¡ . ί г ;..'.. ť, v hiihiY Muí:.' γ
—she preyed her cold hand to her burn¬ ing forehead; sanin's self seemed to !ot*er ; she extended her arms—she wild» iv shrieked, fs>r with Behidera she could have extla med— fi Sray, s'ay, and curu- n'e *" She knew not the approach of the dame, and yet she suffered herself to be b d info the cottage, to be led to her oun chamber; she made no гечылке to tlie к «ııd avsîduitıes of her alarmed ho*. it^ , ^he tcpulsed not the offices of friendship ; she stood as one tranced, a breathing statue, pzle and fixed as mar¬ ble ; her evera) less, a».»d the quitfc ex- pression of her almost «.рсакые íeat *геь sunk in apathy. ín vani the dame ques¬ tioned ; in vain Alliierte "and her^eif chafed the hands and temples of îtti sufferer, ît was long, verv long, ere the ray of sanity re-dawned, ere gratitude, m a faint smile, spoke tbe re t un, of tug- nizance. u Thank Heaven ! thank Heaven, she knows mei" whispered the dame. Kneri-
nig by her side, and grasping her passive hand. Gabrielle motioned to speak, but the ťílurí died in the birth. Long faintings bartended, and when she revived, every power of exertion was fled. Trembling for Li r life, ihe dame watt hed over her; bow 'ыептд to her bhort qui* к breath¬ ing now praviiigfor the slumber of for- «'Vi'uťvr. ьо* Gabrielle, though dead î'>*îuunth, \мч ver alive to гпешогу ; î ., Ί ! frenzied ateenîs of Mortaigne xt Y· к ι L r e'ed upon her ear; ihe last, the j v-í'g ¡¿Lihtc υί his despair, baflled *w'4 t/oit ат tc)¡nposure. In vain she i iti I ¿'u sh the hv dra woe— m vaia í- vr -uti ¿¡rai пя the weakness ot her ι v.. ι h -j mw the morn return w и hou t ¿ι /¡ —- .e avv i\e dav dechr.e wiìhout 1л í. Mor\, jne c:ì.ìì€ utìt, and ch thìea *i> hx. » ι tun. -..ti, to her bed, despair * f* f ti' ' ' her preile-Mu d p >rnon ; .«.v. ^ 4 i iľic Mt, r.iKİ madíiť*s was * i -i.h *i f i -.ií-Lcc. His love ä r > seemed
seemed turned to bitterness, his anxiety to neglect: cold and silent, he approach¬ ed not her dwelling, he heeded not the shriek of her despair. Could it be caprice? could it be the native bent of change? "Oh no, no Γ sobbed Gabrielle; and then she sought, in a revisalof her own conduct, to resolve the mystery ; but deeper and deeper did she plunge 'm the bewildering Lbvrinth. To whom had she snoken —- w hem had she seen to have excited jea¬ lousy ? Her heart acquitted her, and raprice wa-, again taxed; yet carefully did she hide her suspicions, ever did she burv her complaints : she dared not re¬ proach the being she had vowed to ho¬ nour: besides, her heart was not formed h-r reproach, and even had it been, Mor¬ taigne was too much its possessor to have excited the feering. No, patience and ¿uLinission were t! e sad alternâmes, and ever to the inquiries of hrr friend was the weakness of constitution assigned. Khe ich thai the very errors of her hu>- 1л.Л
band should be respected, at least that the idle plaint of the tongue should never witness against him ; she felt that the vi¬ olation of duty in one sanctions not its laxitv in another ; that however the peace may be wounded by neglect, may be stabbed by disappointment, the balm of self-approval may remain. Gabrielle thought that she could act the heroine, vet oft was her pillow steeped in tears; oft, starting from her restless, sleepless couch, did she number the waning hours in melancholy watchfulness; oft, at her casement, did she mark the long slanting shadows which a cloudless moon reflects; vet never did she trace the treasured form of lurking tenderness—never did fthe catch the hoped-for signal of return¬ ing love. cc lie has forgotten —he has abandoned me," she would exclaim : 4i unheard, almost unaccused, he has con· bigned me to suspense, ίο ihe pungent J»«.ngs of solitary wretchedness. Was it just? was it generous?" and then she would
would pause, fearful of even breathing reproach. Often would she recai the image of her absent, of her newdisco- vered brother, and then would the pos¬ sibility of misconstruction cross her brain : she had walked with him in the defile—she had knelt with him on the grave— she had talked to him of the un¬ known calamities of a mutual parent- she had wept with him the desolation of his own hopes; but in a solitude so pro¬ found, what eye could have pierced their haunts ? what ear could have gleaned their converse ? Poor forlorn one ! she guessed not the mischief-meddling fiend, who, blast¬ ing the paradise he could not share, poi¬ soned the confiding heart with the cor¬ roding gangrene of jealousy ! In the absence of the count, Louis had become an inmate of the cottage ; he had beguiled the listlessness of time, and after transient and occasional absences, ever re-sought the comforts of his hum¬ ble
ble home : but Lotus still laboured un¬ der the same melancholy which the dame had so pathetically deplored—still did some buried woe prey upon his spirits- still did it sap, undermine every vestige of native cheerfulness. Often thought¬ ful, often desponding, he would shrink from the voice of raillery, and fly to woo the solace of unsocial gloom. In vain Gabrielle besought the allevia¬ tion of confidence, in vain she pleaded a sister's privilege ; Louis treasured hie secret ; and not till after the receipt of the letter announcing the return of Mortaigne, was that secret revealed ; nay, even then, though extracted by ac¬ cident and amazement, it was imparted conditionally ; for Gabrielle, unheedful of the consequences, first promised, by every bond of honour, to preserve it in¬ violate. It was the arrival of love's dis¬ patch, it was the ray of transport which danced in the eyes of the delighted bride, which excited the inquiry of Louis; till then
then the name of Mortaigne had been concealed-—till then the stolen union was ««guessed at. Gabrielle, elated with hope and joy, forgot her reserve, forgot the rule of caution ; she spoke of an ex¬ pected visitor—she dwelt on the antici¬ pated pleasure of presenting to the count her new-found brother. " What count ?" demanded Louis, gazing on the dappled cheek of beau tv ; but scarce did she pronounce the name of the count de Mortaigne, when starting from his seat he approached the door. f < What ails my brother ?" questioned the alarmed Gabrielle. *' The count de Mortaigne !" repeated Louis. " Just Heaven ! may 1 credit what I hear ? Is the count de Mortaigne spell-bound by my sister? Is he—does he love you, Gabrielle ?" ы I hope so," whispered the blushing girl : " but why should you doubt it ?— why should you doubt his honour?*' " Knowing
íŕ Knowing the attraction, I cannot doubt his love/* said Louis ; " and for his honour, not yon mountain is more ñrm than is his honour/* * f You know him then," said Gabrielle, grateful for this testimony of her lover's worth ; " yon have seen, you—'* ' f No matter, no matter," eagerly in¬ terrupted Louis. " 1 must away. Mor¬ taigne is aH goodness, all honour, all generosity ; yet/' in accents of agitation and dismay, " rather would í die than en¬ counter his eye. Vrge me not !" check¬ ing her efforts to speak; " if he loves, fleet as the winds he will succeed his mes¬ senger. God of nature í if he loves, if welcomed by her he loves, what power can withhold him ?" The eyes of Louis swam in tears. Gabrielle read in one glance the source of his sorrow; it was love, per¬ haps ill-requited love, which banquetted *>n his bosom's peace, which doomed his days
days to sadness í Poor, poor Louis î deep were bis sighs, heavy were hte struggles. " It is indeed the colour öf our fate," whispered Gabrielle, taking his hand, and gazing timidly in his face, * f the bliss or the curse of existence, the dawn of promise, or the poisoned blast which nips the buds of hope.'* Louis started— f( To you be it the dawn of promise,** he murmured, " the genial sunshine of the soul ! to me------" he struct his hand against his forehead, " to me,** with a shuddering sigh, <f be it the blistering, festering tax of presumption." Gabrielle pitied the emotion she could not resolve; yet she knew not what to urge—she knew not whether to question further, or to await the voluntary offer¬ ing of confidence— " Your fears outstep reality," she observed ; ťť for three day3 the count cannot reach the cottage—why not sojourn ¡n peace, then, if you must go—— " Gabrielle/'
<f Gabrielle," interrupted Louis, " yon letter is penned by no cold, untmpas- sioned lover. You know Mortaigne. If a sound floats on the air, does not your heart beat high with hope ?—does not your eyes seek the casement ?—do they not wander in all directions?—does not unbroken solitude extort the sigh ? Tell me then, my sister, whom do you seek—. and why do you sigh ? Alas î if expec¬ tation can thus forestall the bounds of probability, may not apprehension hurry to the like extremity ? Not for worlds would I tarry the arriv?! of Mortaigne. Saints of heaven ! though for him would # 1 sacrifice life, yet must we not meet !" tc May I not name the friend í have found ?" questioned Gabrielle. " Say, Louis, may I not proclaim the tie of con¬ sanguinity which unites us?'* " Not if you value my life—not if you value my honour!" quickly replied the vouth, " Bitter is the struggle, but í dare not encounter Mortaigne." u Dare
" Dare not !" echoed Gabrielle. u Aias f how strangely, how wildly you talk ! You cannot know him ; mild, gentle as the breath of heaven, he owns no thought but peace." " Does nought but fear unstring the soul ?" questioned Louis. <( Is personal courage to be impeached, because man shrinks from cognizance? Trust me, I am no coward/' forcing a smile; t{ yet do I repeat, I dare not meet Mortaigne.'* Gabrielle looked doubtfully at him; every feature betrayed the inward strug¬ gle of his feelings-—" Whither would you go?" she demanded ; fi tell me, my brother, if í must drive you from this peaceful asylum, where will you so¬ journ ?" ťí I care not," said Louis, mournfully; " all places are alike ; perhaps in the ca¬ verns of the mountains—perhaps in the late retreat of my youth's instructor. Why not turn hermit/* forcing a melan- choly
choîy smile, " and renounce the con¬ verse of my fellow-men !" i( And forego all the joys which life yet mav offer/* observed Gabrielle ; s{ re¬ nounce every social duty, every future hope, to become the misanthropic tenant of a lonely cell ! Oh no, the heart would crave change, ere the morbid languor of inanity could freeze all its powers. It is not because Heaven with¬ holds the wild wish of our brain, that the world can yield no palliative. Be¬ lieve me, such conclusions are erro* neous; for man only loses sight of hap¬ piness when he ceases to hope/* " Then have I lost sight of happiness," rejoined Louis; " for Heaven knows, the scarce-fanned taper of hope has long been extinguished !" <f It will relume, it will burn brighter," said Gabrielle, " if you will but woo re« turning peace—if you will but baffle the ' encroachments of despair· In life there к no passport from misfortune, all alike being:
|æmg exposed to endurance and woe ; yet, trust me, my brother, more great, more heroic is the being who struggles against the pressure, than he who supine¬ ly sinks beneath its weight." tfi How easy is theory compared to practice!" said Louis. " Yet, 'm truth, tny sister, ï will not sink without an ef¬ fort. I would fain escape the questions of my more than parent,*' he continued, again approaching the door ; ' f kindly frame some excuse for absence ; and if you can sometimes steal an hour from happy love, meet me at the grave of our sainted mother." " Oh, if you would give me your con¬ fidence!" said Gabrielle, still detaining him ; ** if you would suffer me to share your secret !" Louis gazed on her with tearful eyes; he read the genuine impulse of pity— he traced the native enthusiasm «of her feelings : a pause of thought succeeded *—every doubt, every fear vanished ; he clasped
clasped her hand in his—" Will you pro¬ mise never to betray me ?" he exclaimed; ** will you promise, however untoward be my fate, to cherish my secret as though it were your own ?" *' I do," solemnly replied Gabrielle; * ζ and most religiously will I preserve that promise, never infringing it, even in thought, until absolved by you." Louis would have spoken, but the ap¬ proach of the dame checked the effort ; he could only whisper— " I go to the de¬ file," and then darting through the gar¬ den, he hurried across the plain. Being unwilling as yet to trust the weighty secret of the youth's sorrows to the ear of my reader, lest, losing all zest of interest, she throw aside the page, ϊ will simply close my chapter, by stating, that Gabrielle did follow to the defile, nor did she re-enter the cottage until she had heard and wept the buried woes of Louis; nay, that very night, anxious to hire him back to his home comforts, did she
she pen the ill-starred note, which care¬ lessness dropping in the cypress-grove, became vested in the hands of the insi¬ dious confessor.
CHAP,
CHAP. XV. Tear's trembling pencil, «ver dipt în blacîc r faints to the mind аШш§е images of wòe. Af.Mil)*. Blakk and røykes as her fortøne became the mind of Gabrielle, for the cheating hope which had long buoyed up her spirits faded with the lapse of weefes. Mortaigne came not, he wrote not ; Louis too was absent; and the questione and conjectures of the dame became tor¬ ture to her feelings. She dared riot breathe the known cause, lest reproach and invective should sycoeed; and to pen up ail within her own sad bosom, was to harbour a weight of woe almost too hea¬ vy for endurance. vol. щ. n Health,
Health, by imperceptible gradations, yielded to the anguished fever of he** mind, and soon åtå the sunken eye and faded cheek begin to breathe what the lips would not utter. In vain did she struggle to obtain the conquest she had recommended, to summon the aid of reason, to invoke the blest calm of re¬ signation; theory was indeed easy, com¬ pared to practice, and the rankling cer¬ tainty of neglect, the gangrene oj disap¬ pointed, outraged affection, negatived every effort; for, alas! however the mind may struggle, whilst Memory holds her seat, she wiîî~- *' Point the secret spear, Of many a nameless woe." The assiduities of the dame redoubied ; she watched her drooping inmate with a mother's caution, pitied the half-stolen skh, and wondered where she would not urge. Oft would Gabrielle, grateful for her kindness^
lindness, try to cheat her into peace ; oft would she force the smile of seeming content, of placid acquiescence ; but the eífort was painful, and despair ever mark¬ ed the blank which intervened» Some¬ times she thought of retiring to St. Ho¬ norée, to fly from the seductive haunts of past happiness, to enter, as it were, into a new world, to claim the aid of new scenes, of new associates ; but then she dreaded lest Mortaigne, awakening to justice, should yet seek her at the cot¬ tage—lest prejudice, combining with untoward circumstances, should magnify her flight into repentant guilt—" Oh, no!"she would exclaim ; " I will remain, though I perish—I will cling to the home of his choosing—and here, though he seek me not till the pang of sufferance be passed, he may And the grave of her he has killed by unkindness. Yes, by the side of my mother would I be placed, a second victim to misfortune !" Often n c ¿ would
would she repair to this anticipated sanc¬ tuary—often gaze upon the grass-grow a sod, the promised rest to labour. h was after the long watchings of a restless night, in which Gabrielle had 'm • ЙШ VVUI i^wi—"» 4t The heavy clew of slumber, Fieñb'd without life to live, without death to die/ r that, supported by the arm of the dame, she sought the balsamic freshness of the morning air. Eager to rally something like exertion, she spoke of Louis ; and when her hostess mournfuUy numbered the weeks of Ws absence, she shuddered at this unconscious enumeration of her own widowhood ; for Louis had been gone but one day, when Mortaigne, spurning her offered embrace, doomed her to suspense and anguish. <( it shows such a lack of confidence," £aid the dame, " to leave us without one adieu, without explaining the cause, or the
lhe length of his absence—to doom our lives to vain suppositions and anxious dread/* " It is very cruel/' faltered Gabrielle. " Yes, and unjust too/' resumed the dame. " Heaven knows, there is misery enough in the world without wantonly inflicting it; Heaven knows, that life is little else than a succession of trials !" " I am glad, very glad," said Gabrielle, in that accent of absorption which be¬ trays the thoughts very foreign from tbe subject. " Glad !" echoed the dame, crossing her bosom ; " Jesu Maria ! glad at hu¬ man misery !" " Oh, no !" said Gabrielle, starting, as it were, into being ; if 1 am only glad, if all alike are destined to misery, that the infliction is gradual, else would we be¬ come little better than maniacs." " First must religion be expunged/* observed the dame, solemnly ; u its glo¬ rious
rious promises, its heavenly hopes, all' overthrown, all renounced; for in the soul on which its Yight shines, in the soul upheld by faith, despair cannot enter." " True/* said Gabrielle, bowing her head in conviction ; " but for the innate consciousness of right—but for the shield of faith, few could stem the tor¬ rent/' They had now nearly reached the verge of the cypress-grove, when the sound of footsteps broke the stillness. tc Perhaps 'tis Louis/* whispered the dame, " Perhaps 'tis Mortaigne/* thought Gabrielle, springing forward ; but in¬ stantly she paused, for the fallacious dream of hope was chilled by the pre* sence of a stranger, wrapped in a boat- cloak, his features carefully concealed. The intruder advanced ; he grasped the hand of the astonished girl ; he press¬ ed it with no common pressure ; then dropping
/»í
dropping a folded paper at her feet, be¬ fore the dame could reach the spot upon which she stood, he retreated, he disap¬ peared amid the foliage.
END OF VOL. UL
Primed by J. Darling, Leaden h til-Street, London,
