Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Margiana: or, Widdrington tower: a tale of the fifteenth century
aw an w OTiwwiHMn n w wr •*,.-. »—■w^^ffW *"—wwig
M«£ RG 1*4 JV*A,
C II A P. L jT/rsi Lore. * Jr OR many days after Ethelred's depar¬ ture, there was a coldness in Lord Wid¬ drington's behaviour to his daughter, which he appeared at some pains to maintain, but which, nevertheless, sensibly afflicted her. Slie could not repent of what she had done, and hoped that, in a short time, her father would become as cordial towards her as ever; but she had hot been accus¬ tomed to the deprivation of his affection ; she had never before, within her r-emem- vol. ii. a brance,
brante, in any degree offended him, and now deeply lamented that she could not, consistently with her own notions of right and wrong, comply with a!l his wishes—- Fthelred's parting gift had affected her, but only so far as to increase her regret that hhe could not return his love. The little wrapt up parcel he put into her hands, ju;t before he left Edgehill, contained the eventful bracelet, and these few written words :—" I submit to your decision, since it must be as you would have it; but 1 will rcver forget you/* When she considered all the advantages Ethelrcd possessed, and which would pro¬ bably have recommended him to the ac¬ ceptance of almost any other woman than herself, with affections equally disengaged, she was surprised at her* own insensibility, and blamed herself for it, involuntary as it was. Sometimes, but always with an ef¬ fort, she forced her thoughts to turn to¬ wards a future union with him, but still found
found her aversencss so strong, as to amount almost to antipathy, It was a re¬ lief when she admitted the hope of his speedily forming an attachment to some woman endowed with tenderer feelings; and no coquette ever more anxiously sought to fix herself in the heart and me¬ mory of an admirer, than Margiana wished Kthelred might find himself mistake:;, when Le had mi id he should never forget her. As to Clara Ca-»tle^, though she seriously liked Ethelred better than any person she had ever seen, and while he wa* pre*ent, believed herself to be, and perhaps really wns, desperately in love* with him, the more, as Margiana's coldness flattered !ur hopes, yet, after his departure, her accus¬ tomed vivacity did not continue long much overcast. She flattered herself she should •oon see him again' in London, ^eaneL in some degree, from his fondtiess for Mar¬ giana, by her persevering refusal of him : for,'as Ethelrcd had informed Lord Wid- a £ dr nc/on
drington of what had past between his daughter :*nd himself, and Lord Widdring¬ ton had repeated it to Lady Rothes, it was * no secret to Clara, who almost trembled when she reflected on what might have been the consequence of her own folly, in stealing the bracelet; for, with the acute- nessofa person in love, she readily and rightly com hided he had been encouraged to break his long-continued silence, by the belief of its remaining in Margiana's pos¬ session : she resolved no future act of her's should ever precipitate another similar chance; and, from the knowledge she had now acquired of Margiana's character, still cherished the idea of inspiring Ethelred, at some future time, with a passion for herself. Lady Rothes, less prejudiced, was of a very different opinion. She saw that Clara was not the sort of woman likely ever to impress the mind of Winburne with a thought oflove ; but she forbore to mor-
tifv her friend, by uttering her sentiments; and indeed her general health became now so much a fleeted, by the situation she was in, and exertion of every kind grew so extremelv irksome to her, that she chiefly confined herself to her own apartment, and left her two young guests to amuse themselves as they thought fit, separately or together. This leisure time was applied by Mar- giana to the most sensible purpose. Clara's uncle had a good collect ion,of manuscripts for that unlettered period, and, to these Margiana applied, for pleasure and im¬ provement. They afforded her.both, and gave her what had been almost the only advantage she had before wanted, a know¬ ledge of foreign literature ; for old Castles, in his youth, had been much abroad, and had brought from thence some valuable writings of the works of,the best Italian authors; and Margiana, in her early youth, b 3 had
had been rendered by her father a veij" excellent Italian scholar. Clara had neither the abilities nor the desire of participating in this amusement, and therefore, when Margiana was engaged in it, her resource was to ramble about in the fields, when the weather was fine; sometimes with Lord Widdrington, but oftener alone; for he now began to be much employed in writing, and sending of!' dispatches, the answers to which fre¬ quently plunged him into athoughtfulness, that, he would .walk out alone to indulge. Old JCendrew was always h'-; trusty mes¬ senger on these occasions; and there was a degree of mystery attended his journies, so unlike the former open and ingenuous dealings of her father, that Margiana feared lie wa> engaged in some political scheme that required caution and secrecy. She was in t\\Q right. These ferments that
that'had occasioned a good deal of clamour. early after the accession of Henry the Fourth, hid now subsided into profound but treacherous silence. Dissatisfaction, as might easilv have been foreseen, rankled in the bosoms of those proud Barons who*- - disappointed ambition or insatiable avaric: led them now to hate the sovereign whom they thought backward to reward their pa»£ guilty services; and there was no alterna¬ tive between suffering him to reign and terminating his existence. His most inveterate foes, at this period, were the Earls of Kent, Huntingdon, and Salisbury ; for the house of Northumber¬ land still continued in such high favour with the King, as ]eft them no pretence to desert his cause ; though the Earl himself, whose pride was immeasurable, seldom dis¬ guised his opinion, that it was scarcely in the power, even of royalty itself, to bestow rewards on them equal to their deserts.
s4
Lord
Lord Widdrington's faithful attachment fo the deposed monarch being well known, the conspiring Barons applied, in the first instance, for his concurrence with their project, which was to seize King Henry s person, and reinstate Richard on his throne. It is not to be supposed he endeavoured to dissuade them from' their purpose. In promising to join them, he only followed the dictates of his own conscience ; and would have esteemed himself a traitor and a coward, had he refused them his assist¬ ance; but he differed in opinion from some of them, respecting the time when it would be most proper to display their sen¬ timents, and hazard their bold attempt.— The Earls of Salisbury and Huntingdon thought the favourable crisis was already arrived ; but Lord Widdrington, as well as the Earl of Kent, judged it would be more advisable to wait awhile uulil their party strengthened, and the spirit of discontent became more general. This difference in their sentiments, «nd a variety of other causes.
causes, induced the necessity of frequent intercourse by letter; and Kendrew was a tna-i known and trusted bv the whole partv> through Lord Widdrington's recommenda¬ tion. Many of their communications, therefore, past through his hands ; and he looked forward to the restoration of the captive King, with an anxiety almost as deep, and a zeal almost as glowing, as those of his Lord But a bare suspicion of the truth, unsupported by any certainty, gave extreme uneasiness to the filial feelings of Margiana. To have restored her lawful King to his rights, she would cheerfully ha; e sacrificed her rank in society, and her prospect of future affluence; but after having acknowledged the sovereign^ of his successor, to endeavour hU overthrow by concealed measures, bore so much the character of treachery, that she could not, without shuddering, admit the idea of her lather being concerned in a scheme of such a nature. Yet, hateful as it was, when she observed Kendrew's frequent absences, she a & could
could not help admitting it. The subject of his dispatches she found was wholly un¬ known, even to Lady Rothes, in whom Lord Widdrington had confided, on other occasions, with a want of disguise amount¬ ing to indiscretion ; and from her own so¬ ciety he absented himself, with a perseve¬ rance she imagined could not entirely pro¬ ceed from any resentment he had felt against her on Ethelred's account. It was probable, therefore, his mind was occupied by some object of peculiar importance ; and she knew that object was pursued with mystery. She knew he hated Henry of Lancaster upon principle, and would die to serve King Richard ; but she was also aware that the danger of engaging in any new insurrection was extreme, from the deci¬ sive and severe character of the present so¬ vereign. It was no wonder, therefore, if the existing appearances excited her utmost anxiety; however, she concealed her sus¬ picions ; never attempted to draw an ex¬ plaining word from Kendrew, whose at¬ tachment
tachment to her so nearly approached ido¬ latry, that he perhaps could not have with¬ held from her any secret she endeavoured to extract from him, and waited, with in¬ ward apprehension, and apparent compo¬ sure, either till time should reveal all, or her father, restoring her to his hitherto al¬ most boundless confidence, should explain the purposes that engaged his thoughts. Ethelrcd and Wallop had been gone near a month, when Kendrew, returning from one of bis secret expeditions to the neighbourhood of London, brought her a letter from her favourite Harold, which, as lie had prbmised her some intelligence concerning her sister, she had waited for with much impatience. She found the in¬ formation it brought her far from satisfac¬ tory. It was thus expressed ;—
e & {t MT
" J-IY DEAREST I.AOV, ls I greatly v\bh you was here; and your presence, from many causes, is wanted by more than L But you would have me talk of your sister;— nnd therefore I will begin by saying what, for your sake, I am very sorry for, that I see no reason to alter the opinion I formed some time ago, of her partiality for Lord Lothian, gtnd his for her. I have occasion¬ ally met them both at the palace, and hrs attentions are as particular as they appear to be welcome. Ladv Genevieve is civil and gentle to all, yet seems to suffer any interruption when he is talking to her, with impatience. This has not prevented try sometimes joining ihem, when their conversation, of course, became general; but Lord Lothian, I believe, is no more paitia! to mv society than I am to his. He laughs at mj roughness, and I at his courtly aiit; though, were it not for yourself '^nd your fair sister, for whose interests I would do
do very much indeed, I hope I should sel¬ dom waste a thought, and still seldomer a \^ord, on such a tri/Jer. "" A few days ago, seeing them deeply engaged, I bade Ethelred ^o and disturb the serpent that was whispering in the ear of Eve ; but on his approach, the capri¬ cious fair one moved off, and placed herself near the Princess Philippa, where he did not presume to follow her, fk Yet though her want of judgment h such as raises my wonder in a sister of your's, her behaviour can neifhev be called l\^\t nor giddy. She carries an air of de¬ jection, that does not leave her, even when her attention is immediately ingrossed by her favourite ; and is very seldom seen be¬ yond the limits of Queen Isabella's apart¬ ments, whither Lord Lothian has never been invited. The most unaccountable circum¬ stance is, that he still speaks cf vou in the stile I am told he always has done, calling you his idol, and the radiant lady of his bean; and whatever his other faults may be,
be, I do not believe he can be justly accu¬ sed of hypocrisy. In fine, there is no sa\ing how this will end, if you continue much longer where you are. Lady Genevieve is a ship at sea without a pilot, and not well furnished with ballast. If you was here, she would be kept trim, and sail steadily, and the pirate Lo¬ thian mioht crowd his canvas in vain.— Come, therefore, for her sake, and rejoice all who know you, and who now lament your absence. Ethelred is no more than the ghost of the gay soldier I once knew him ; though there are Claras in abundance who, with not half your sense, have twice your discernment to appreciate his perfec¬ tions, and would be ready enough to catch his stray glances, were any thrown in their of O - way ; but he has neither a word nor a look to give them; and his thoughts are at Edgehtll, with the fair ingrate who sets no- value upon them. (f Lord Percy is now in the North ; and ©n hbreturn will be married to young Lord March's
March's amiable sister. May .her future happiness, *a« his wife, conquer your strange prejudices, and tempt you to-trust an honest man with your hand 1 " Some rumours are beginning to pre¬ vail, as if the fickle inhabitants of the Southern counties were weary of King Henry's sway ; but I hope they will subside without spreading to any alarming extent. We have had enough of civil war, and had better engage with foreign foes than cut the throats of one another. I hope and trust the King is safe. fl In the expectation of seeing you again before long, I remain, dear ^nd deserving Lady Margiana, your faithful servant, {< H. Wallop"
Amazed and chagrined by this strange account of her sister, Margiana began se¬ riously to wish that she could return to London, to observe her actions, and obtain her entire confidence; but she could not express 6
express her desire without revealing the: cause of it, which, for Genevieve's sako, she felt extremely averse 'to do, though assured of th^ concurrence of Lady Rothes, who, from a very different motive, would be as anxious as herself to impede what seemed to be Lord Lothian's present pur¬ suit. Unfurnished, therefore, with any reason for proposing a removal to London, she took the first opportunity of asking Lady Rothes how soon she herself thought of leaving Edgehil! ? and was told, that as that lady intended being confined in town, she certainly should not delay her depar¬ ture longer than whilst she could travel with safety. Lord Widdrington too, who was present, observed, that after he had received answers to some letters he should shortly send into Surry, he should have no farther reason to prolong his stay ; but, on the contrary, expected to be then under the necessity of leaving Warwickshire. Margiana, finding that Kendrew's n?xt expedition
expedition would not be deferred above a few days, resolved on repressing her impa¬ tience for a personal interview with her sister, and again exerting her influence by letter, either to open her eyes to the pre¬ cipice on which she stood, or at least to gain her unreserved confidence, and in¬ duce her to paube before she committed herself too fur. In the hope of one of these views being fulfilled, she thus wrote to Genevieve:—
<r I am very impatient to see you again, my dearest sister. My heart is wrung on your account, I do not hear from you ; you no longer remember me. For whom am I forgotten ? Relieve, I be¬ seech you, rny painful anxiety, by telling me it is not for Lord Lothian, if you can truly tell me so. But if you cannot, if indeed he has won the affections of one so infinitely
gateuij*____
infinitely superior to his merits, let me know the worst; and though the love I bear you will make such intelligence hard to endure, yet u will be less intolerable than the suspense I am now under. '* Nevertheless, mcthinks a partiality for him would be so degrading to my Gene¬ vieve, tha: I ft el ready to ask !>er forgive¬ ness for susp<:( ting her of it. Can an un* principled HherfitK 1 , a thoughtless violent \onth, who has Mwa\s been the abject slave of his own passions, be the chosen ob¬ ject of my sister's love ? Oh no ; it seems impossible! The purity of your own cha¬ racter forbids thesufposition. Nay, honest pride forbids it; for what feeling heart could endure to see the partner of its choice held in low estimation by its peers? And it is not too hard a word to say, that Lord Lothian has at various times, by his ex¬ cesses, drawn on himself the contempt of the court. United to such a man, how would my father and myself, dearest Gene- vicve, lament o\er vour lost happiness ! " Yet,
if Yet, if he really has gained an inte¬ rest in your heart, at least do nothing rashly, I implore you. A continuance of real attachment may improve for a time, though I fezr k will never reform him; and by marriage, in a mind like his, attach¬ ment will be terminated. To a libertine, the object farthest from his reach is.alwav.s the most desirable* The boldness of at¬ tempt has greater charms for him than any a virtuous lc/e can offer. '* Kendrew will give this into your own hands. Let him bring me back your an¬ swer, I entreat you. My father talks of not staying here* a great while longer.—- How hpppy I shall be to embrace you again 1" About a week after his setting out for Surry, Kendrew returned, having past through London, from whence he brought the following letter from Genevieve to her sister ;~— "Who
,f Who on have been at so much pains to prejudice von against me, Margiana? How unforti-:iate am I that they have succeeded so well ! There was a time yon thought well of ire; what have I done to forfeit your good opinion ? There was a time you would have believed my asseverations,' why am I no longer .credited ? My last letter, metivnks, might have convinced you of my si;-rerity. I therein solemnly assured you Lord Lothian was an object of indifierence to me Kither you placed no confidence iu my assurance, or you suppose I have since chanu"d—• Suppose so still, since you will have it so, and since it is needless for me to protest even the truth. "' Yet have I ever deceived you ? V:ut perhaps, since I last saw you, I may be al¬ tered. I wish I had your firmness of mind, your character, your inditlercnce for every body ; and T wish also to see you, though 1 know I shall be ashamed when we meet. Yet
Yet I cannf>t sav whv I should be so. i have done nothing wrong, that \ am con¬ scious of. But you maintain that those only who have done wrong can be un¬ happy. If that be true,, I must have wan¬ dered from the right path, for it is long since I have been happy; and long, very long it will be before I can be happy again-—if e*er. " I had almost forgotten to tell you, that our beloved and respected Queen Isa¬ bella is about to depart for her native country, ha\ing at length obtained the King's consent to be restored to her brother of France ; and she has commanded me to say she is desirous of bidding you farewell before she quits England. You w ill pro¬ bably, therefore, set out immediately;— and I must prepare for a meeting I-wish for, yet fear, I know not why. Be not too hard upon me, Margiana. Make allow¬ ances for the difference of our natures, vet continue to support me by your example and
and ad\ ire, and be assured of the unalter¬ able affection of your " GcKEVUVE."
>fargiana w T as utterly at a loss what conclusion to form, when she hnd read this incoherent, and almost contradictory let¬ ter; but her impatience to see her sitter was considerably increased. She hastened to see her fa:fief, and, without making any particnlar mention of Genevieve, ac¬ quainted him vifh the Queen's approach* ing departure, of which his own* letters also made mention ; and of her Highness's de¬ sire to see her' before it fook place. She reminded him of what he had said, that after the return of his messenger, he should be imdcV the necessity of teaming Edgehil I; but Lord Widdrington replied; that some" circumstances/which had intervened, must protract his"departure t -^* f HoweVer," con¬ tinued
linued he, " I would not have you defer shewing your respect for the Queen's wishes, a single hour longer than is abso¬ lutely necessary. Dispatches 1 have re¬ ceived require immediate answers. Ken- dreww ; ll return with them to-morrow, and he sh /.I n"c vou safe in London. Prepare yourself, »hcr° r ore i to be ready bv break of uav, It cannot now be lonj before we meet/' He spoke in the tone of his accustomed fondness. Margiana, for the moment, forgot alf her anxiety, and kissing his hind, gaily left him to make preparation^ for her departure; which done, she re¬ paired to Lady Rothes, with whom finding Clara Castles, she acquainted them both with the journey she was to begin the next morning, and the occasion of it Lady Rothes was too much occupied with her own state of health, and selfish anxiety for her own safety, to feel, or even to express much regret at her loss; and Clara, with a civility
civility wholly insincere, declared she was extremelv scrry to be deprived of such a companion. In fact, she set no value whatever on Margiana's society, and would have been quite indifferent to her going, had her destination been any where but to a place where she would unavoidably see Ethelred again, Margiana, who easily penetrated her thoughts, inwardly smiled at the apprehen¬ sions of the self-tormentor, even while her good-nature pitied a weakness she had never felt. She received her professions of friendship with the laith they merited, and cordially wished both her and Lady Kothes their health and happiness, until they should all meet again. But her heart glowed with delight, when, on her setting out, her father took leave of her with all his former boundless auction. A separation from her, short as it was likely to prove, called forth every emotion of his latent
latent love, and for some hours after he lost si:»ht of her, the remembrance of the dangerous conspiracy in which he was en- g"'»*ed, of Henry's usurpation, and even of Richard's wrongs, faded on hh mind. The dispatches he had last received were from the I/ud of Kent, who informed him that it was expected the court would, in a few weeks, remove to Windsor; and that he himself had lately had a meeting with the other disaffected Lords, wherein they had unanimou^lv agreed to defer their at¬ tempt till then, when n favourable oppor¬ tunity mi;;ht b? S; «/c! of securing the K'p;/s person, with more promptness and iiiciiity than could be expected v,hile he continued in London. Hence originated Lord Widdrington's protracted stay at Kdgohiil. He wished. until the exigences of the moment abso¬ lutely required his presence, to avoid the sight of a sovereign whose destruction he was endeavouring to compass. vol. ix, e CHAP,
CHAR IT. Fir it Sorrow, li was a still grey morning, at the latter end of autumn, when Margiana left lU\gt~ hill, attended by Kendrew, and two other inferior domestics She was not so mtrh disposed to attend to the berunies cf the road, as she had been, the first time <die travelled it Tar different subjects now- occupied her thoughts, and weakened the effect of oerv external object. Her own well reguh'^d mind gave herno disturbance, but, on the different situations of her fa¬ ther and her J tcr, she mused with equal $nd unceasing anxiety, The former .,as fascinated
fascinated by an imperious and unprin¬ cipled woman ; th^ latter, she believed, ensnared by a licentious, frivolous youth. The happiness of both seemed greatly to depend on their conduct during the present crisis, and her heart beat in unison with their danger. If her father's long attach¬ ment to Lady Uothcs ended in marriage, it was probable hii honour, as well as his peace of mind, would be the inevitable sacrifice ; and he had littie chance of cseao- ing from the web woven around hi.n, by one who, to the charms of earlv a^-e, added the shrewdness of maturity. Concerning Genevieve, her judgment sfili remained to be formed. To the or/- rion of Wallop, a friend equally discern¬ ing and sincere, she had hitherto had no¬ thing to oppose but the assurances of a girl, who, however artless and unreservtd until now, had written incoherently on the subject,and acknowledged henclf unhappy, without assigning any reason for being so. c 2 Margiana'*
Marglana's affi'ctionate heart throbbed when she reached her father's door, and was told her sister was within She ran into the "douse, and into the apartment where thev usually sat. Gencvie\e was not there. She proceeded up stairs into herlodgiug-room.—-It was empty. There was a small door in it concealed beneath the arras, which led into a closet bevond, Margiana opened it, and beheld her sister in tears, sitting near a little table, over which her arms were thrown, as if in the negligence of sorrow. She looked up at the noise—started at the sight of Margi¬ ana—and raising her arms, let them fall again, extended across the table. " Genevieve ! dear Genevieve !" cried Margiana—"Oh, my sister!" she replied; but rising to meet her, seemed unable to advance. Margiana prest her to her bo¬ som, and they wept over each other. Ge¬ nevieve appeared anxious to break the silence, as if afraid of what her sister might say.—" Alas!" she exclaimed, in a tremu¬ lous
unhappy Queen ! The second day after to¬ morrow is fixed ,|br her departure. Rich¬ ard has bcc» sent from the Tower, no one knows whitht-r : and youraudden entiance, added to thN di'.i.uil nev.s 1 hc:d but just received, quite o\crpowered i::e." Margiana, to aRe\iatc her di^tre>s and confusion, which were apparent, affected to think her behaviour extremerV natural, and to give entire credit to what she said ; but after the first hurry of their meeting subsided, and she had leisure to observe the altered figure of her lister, her heart bled with anguish, such as she had never felt before. The beautiful Genevieve was as lovely as ever; but it was the lo-xl-.x-ss of de¬ jection. Instead of the jvim inent glow of youth, her t heek was'ng?<i with the transient blush of hecth. or o. shame.— Her form was almost as thin t;j that of an c 3 serial
aerial spirit; her breathing seemed to la¬ bour beneath a weight that oppressed it,*— Sometimes she seemed almost gasping for air; and her eye sunk under that of her sister, mild as it was. " Ah ! Lothian," sighed Margiana, to herself, " is all this ravage thine ?" By degrees, however, she recovered from her embarrassment, and, with tolerable composure, enquired after her father and Lady Rothes ; and asked for a detail of the occurrences at Edgehill. After satisfying what she believed to be only an assumed curiosity, Margiana, in her turn, changed the conversation to the news of the court, and learned, with a regret she might not have felt, but for her fathers sake, thnt re¬ ported schemes against the life of King Henry were generally, though cautiously, whispered. These but too strongly cor- roborated the fears she bad before so much reason to entertain ; but she forbore to express her apprehensions to her sister, or even
even to mention the mysterious manner in which Kendrew had been lately employed. On the subject of Lady Kothes she was less reserved; and to prepare Genevieve for what she believed unavoidable, inge¬ nuously told her the footing on which that lady appeared to stand with their father, and the strong probability there was that their marriage would take place after her recovery, if not even before. Genevieve* seemed little moved by this information. She said their father best knew what would make him happy, and there was no harm in his fancying Lady Kothes possessed of that power. It would be harj if, at his 'nne of life, he was not to be allowed to please himself. Margiana was surprised, for Genevieve had once thcight differently ; but recol¬ lecting that L-id-' Hollies was Lord Lothian's sister, she dotibted the change might be too c 4 easily
easily accounted for, and felt astonished at Genevieve's duplicity. hhe wished now to see her in company with this dangerous young nobleman, ima¬ gining she might be able to gather enough from their behaviour either to conlirm or remove her apprehensions ; but for this there would be no opportunity the two following days, as they meant to dedicate both to Queen Isabella, who disliked, and never invited him. His name w T as not once mentioned between the two sisters that first evening; and the next morning, Genevieve seemed anxious to talk on in¬ different subjects, as if to avoid any par¬ ticular one. At the usual time they waited on the Queen, whose former doep sorrow ap¬ peared now in some degree mitigated, by the near prospect of returning to her na¬ tive land ; though the hidden fate of her wretched husband cast a dark shade of anxiety
anxiefy over her brow. She received Mar¬ giana, whom she had always tenderly loved, with open arms ; thanked her for her ready attendance; enquired kindly after Lord Widdrington, and asked her if she was re¬ turned from Edgehill the same fair indif¬ ferent she had gone thither?—" Indeed/" she continued, " I marvel at you. Not that you are insensible to the fine person and mild graces of Ethelrcd Winburne— for exterior advantages have no power over you—but the blunt honesty of his friend I did suspect yon would have found irresistible." In the coirrse of thfe day^ the Queen, ex¬ pressing a desire to speak with Margiana in private, ordered hdr attendance in her own closet; land -when they were alone, acquainted her tha$ sheliad 1 , for some time past*,; wished her return on account of her &&fer,^ ( Hady Genevieve/' said Isabella, "us not fDrfef5ed*of the same materials that you are;; 'ami iris to be feared^has already VJ ' c5 put
put her happiness out of her own power, by placing her affections on one of the most worthless young men about the court. Lord Lothian, who has been so long and vainly striving to obtain your heart, ap¬ pears to have won that of your sister al¬ most without an effort, and probably with no ucher view than that of meanly tri¬ umphing over it. Those who have op¬ portunities of seeing them together, which I have not, describe his behaviour as light and frivolous; and her's that of a person deeply impressed with partiality too strong for concealment. May your example and advice awaken her before it is too lute, and save her from the consequences of an un¬ requited passion, or an ill-assorted union ; for her timid and delicate nature renders her little St to be the wife of Lord Lothian. 1 am sufficiently her and your friend, to caution you on one point particularly.— She is soothed, and foolishly encouraged in her attachment by her friend, and con" Mmt, Catherine Mortimer; and perhaps the
the wisest thing you can do will be, never to talk to her of Lord'Lothian at all.—Has she ever/' pursued the Queen, " acknow¬ ledged to you her love for him ?" Margiana, with grateful thanks for Isa¬ bella 'a condescension, briefly related all that had past upon the subject. ft Harold Wallop/' said the Queen, ff is good authority; and I fear he has been but too accurate in his observations. It is a thousand pities, for Genevieve is a charm¬ ing creature; but lam glad she has never yet spoken to you herself. There is a dif¬ ficulty in i\r>t breaking silence, in a case of this nature, which you will act prudently not to remove. That barrier overcome, she will regard nil the rest as easy, and will depend on her father's affection and your good-nature, for yielding to her attach¬ ment, when it appears vain to oppose it. Your avoiding the subject may render her ashamed of it; and as long as it remains c G unknown
unknown r> lard Widdrington, she may fear his becoming better informed/* Margiana, v,ho agreed entirely with the Queen, promised fo conform strictly to her adure; and Isabella then, apologis¬ ing for the introduction of a theme that could not but be unpleasant, asked if her young friend did not shortly expect to lind Lady Rothes acknowledged as Lord Widdrington's wife ? Surprised at the terms in which this question was conveyed, Mar¬ giana hesitated for a rep'y. The Queen, observing her confused, said—" You must forghc me, Margiana. I know how de¬ votedly attaciied vou are to vour father, and that, to speak of whatever docs him no credit must be painful to you. But you can hardly be a stranger to the report that has long prevailed here, that he has been privately married to Lady Rothes, since they went into Warwickshire. Her family seem doomed to act as the evil geniuses of your's/* Margiana,,
Margiana/still more astonished, made answer that such a report had never reached her before, and that she now gave no belief to it— <f Though 1 own," con- simied she, with hesitation, <( it is to be feared that ere long------." " I understand you," interrupted Isa¬ bella, Ci and shall be extremely glad to hear that your fears prove unfounded; But in case of ihe worst, and that Lord Widdring¬ ton, forgetful of what he owes to his vir¬ tuous daughters, and to himself, really im¬ poses on them such a stepmother, and thereby renders his house irksome to either or both of you, remember, my dear Mar¬ giana, that wherever Isabella is, there you and your sister may at all times be assured of a welcome. With me, at the court of France, you shall find, whenever you are disposed to seek it, a shelter from any evils that an alliance with a woman of Ladv Rothes's abandoned character may bring upon you ; and if Lady Genevieve's unac¬ countable attachment should last, change of 6
of scene may prove a means of weaning her from the unworthy object of her choice." Margiana made a suitable acknowledg¬ ment to the Queen for her kindness; and soon after, having received an order to wait upon her at an early hour the next day, when all those who had persevered in their attentions during her adversity were to be admitted to take their last leave cf her, she returned home with her sister, whose de¬ jection seemed so profound, that Margiana could not help assigning it to a cause that had not occurred to her before. She fan¬ cied Genevieve apprehended the sight of her miiiht renew Lord LothiM/a former passion ; znd there was. at times, a shyness in her sister's behaviour that strengthened this suspicion. Without appearing to notice it, she herself behaved \/uh her usual tenderness, znd a fleeted a cheerfulness she was far from feeling, in crJer, if pos¬ sible., to detach Genevieve's thoughts front the
the person she feared they dwelt too much upon ; v rupnlonsly avoiding, as the Queen bad rc<.or..ir*jnJled, all mention of hiin. The following day, as they were prepar¬ ing to go to the Queen's apartments, Mar¬ giana presented to her sUtcr the bracelet >;ie had woven for her at Edgehill;— "' and/* said she, f - that you may not be without a companion to it, for the other arm, I shall be unthankful enough to be¬ stow on >ou this also, which was given me b\ Kthelred Winburne, and which it resem- ble* e\acil\ /' *• It seems to be wrought with his own hair/' said Genevieve. '• It is," replied Margiana; "but ash, is vour cousin, you can wear it with pro¬ priety enough." " lie \souId not be much flattered," ob¬ served Genc\ieve, " if he knew you gave away bis present." *• It ii not my intention to flatter him, my dearsKter. I never deceived him with a false
a fake hope yet. As a brother f regaui him j and one of the fir*t wishes of my heart is, that he reall/ might become my brother." Gene^ieve turned away from her sister and wept,—-" You think I can be disposed of to any one/' said she, in a captious tone of reproach.—" You think meanly of me ; I know you do, and I cannot bear it. But forgive my petulance," she added, observ¬ ing Margiana looked both hurt and sur¬ prised.—" Forgive my w T eakness and folly. 3 would give the world for your firmness of mind-—for iour self-possession. I would ask vour advice ; but what would it audi ? I should be too feeble to follow it." f( Think better Of yourself, my dear Ge¬ nevieve, and do not desert your own cause? Let a proper sense of jouro^n worth*— let a justifiable pride support you/* " Alas I"-cried she, " ;vhal h^ve I to"'do with pride r Mine is humbled ; my spirit is broken. He never- did—he never will love me." * ' '* Grieve
*" Grieve not at that, mv dearest sister.— llather rejoice at a circumstance that must in time restore you to yo«:r peace. Can vou know yourself an object of indiffer¬ ence to a character so inferior, and hesi- tite a moment to drive him from your heart ? Make the effort: I am sure you arc capable of it. Lot others share in your attentions. Draw comparisons. They cannot but be to his disadvantage." t{ Margiana/' replied Genevieve, " you have determined me. I will open my whole heart to you, and never, in future, disguise one of its emotions from my best friend. You will relieve me with your pity, instead of oppressing me with your scorn, and I shall be soothed and lamented. ■—The very first time I saw Lord Lo~ thian——." " Stop, my dearest Genevieve, Let me not, by listening to you, lead you into an error. I will not undertake the part of your confidant, to encourage \ou in your most matciial one. I lament you as it is ; but
but I will, never nourish, by a false indul¬ gence, the weakness I condemn. Over¬ come that, and then I will not pity, but admire you, which I can never do while you cherish a destructive passion for one who, e\en by your own confession, be¬ holds you with inditference/* Genevieve made no reply. She hastily dried her tears; and Margiana thought she read in her countenance a slight expres¬ sion of indignation; but whether it pro¬ ceeded from resentment against herself, or mortified pride, she was unable to dis¬ tinguish. Their conversation ceased, and they proceeded to wait upon the Queen. They fonnd her little court already as¬ sembled, and, titter she had spoken to them, they were joined by Kthelred and Wallop, who came to greet Margiana on her return from the country. The complexion of the former was heightened as he ap¬ proached her, but both expressed the live- Jie&t
was with great pain she observed they paid a cold civility to Genevieve, that scarcely covered a sentiment bordering on con¬ tempt ; and feared that she had indeed lowered herself in the general estimation. Of this, however, and of all that was pass¬ ing before her eyes, the melancholy that was settlett on Genevieve's features seemed to leave her hardly a consciousness. Nor were any of the company present much more disposed to 4 gaiety than Gene¬ vieve herself. The Queen was very much beloved ; and the thoughts of her ap¬ proaching departure occasioned universal gloom. She was to set off the next morn¬ ing, attended by a strong escort; and many who were not appointed of it, tendered the last mark of their respect, by offering to accompany her ; some as far a^ Canter¬ bury, and others the whole way to the sea¬ side.
Of
Of these Margiana was one; but Isabella refused them all, declaring she would not suifer any but those named for her guard, to see her further than the palace gate.—- With gratitude and afleciion, however, she took leave of every one.^—" I go y my friends/' said she, * r never to behold you or England more. Yet mourn not my de¬ parture, for this has been a fatal country to inc. Whiie Kstrive to forget it, I will che¬ rish the remembrance of your faithful at~ tachment; it shall never be erased from my mind." Observing Margiana in tears—" Weep not for me," pursued she, pressing her hand.— (i Your passions are ali well regu¬ lated ; let them not break forth on this oc¬ casion. Keflect, I must be happier in France than I have ev^r been here. Bat let my unfortunate Richard have the prayers of you all/' She dismissed her pensive guests, with leave to see her again the next morning; when
when they availed themselves of the per¬ mission, anxious to obtain another and a 3a^t sight of this amiable princess. She was much affected, and visibly struggled to repress her emotion. fche repeated her thanks to all, and renewed her imitation to Margiana and Genevieve to come to her in France, ii their fathers house should ever become to them an unpleasant home.— *' Then," addressing herself \n general to the little assembly, tk 1 bid you all-adieu," said she, waving her hand, and mournfully smiling. " Having known me in prospe¬ rity, you have not forsaken me in afflic¬ tion. God bless you all for it ! and 1 will make it my constant prayer to Heaven that you may nev*r own a sovereign less soli¬ citous for your welfare than nuself. Re¬ commend my unhappy husband to the protection of Providence ; for Providence only can now befriend him/* Her voice here faltered; and many of her auditors were in tears, Margiana and Genevieve
Genevieve were bathed in theirs, while the seemingly rugged Wallop covered over hu stern face; and the milder Winburne, kneeling to the Queen, kissed one of her hands, but was unable to speak. She ex¬ tended the other to Margiana.—" May the Almighty preserve you !" said she; (< and under him your virtue and your prudence be vour guides !—Farewell '/' She then motioned to Ethelred to lead her forward ; and at the door of the apart¬ ment, she was met by the Prince of Wales, and Prince John of Lancaster, who con¬ ducted her down stairs, and committed her to the care of her escort in waiting. As soon as ^he was gone, her friends looked at each other in silent dejection ;~~ but so lively was the sorrow of the two sisters, that Ethelred and Wallop hastened to vithdraw them from the public eye ; and Margiana, observing Lord Lothian to be amongst those who had followed the Prince
I'titne of Wales, was anxious to remove \wth her sifter, before he a'pprorudied them. They therefore returned home, where, after awhile, Margiana's distress subsided into a tender recollection of her regretted patron¬ ess, whilst the anguish that corroded Gene¬ vieve's heart seemed as permanent as it was severe.
CHAP.
gi'-r.i.'j g.
CHAP. 111. /f w « a;isc Child that know its own Tulhtr. After Margiana had been near three week? in London, she became extremely impa¬ tient to hear from her father, and to know- how soon she might expect his return.—- She did not credit the report of his having been privately married, which the Uucen had apprized her of; but she was fully aware of the danger of his present situation, and that his future honour and happiness depended on his extricating himself from it. Sometimes she thought of alleviating her anxiety, by returning to Edgehill ;— but
much from the state of her mind to allow of her going also, and Margiana couhi not think of leaving her alone. Besides, shs supposed her father's absence would not now be of long duration, and therefore resolved to wait as patiently as she could, until she cither saw or heard from him. In the mean time, the PrincessesPhilippa and Blanche, who admired the beauty and amiable oualities of the two charminjr sisters, were urgent with them to resume their attendance at court. Gcne\icve ap¬ peared alike iiidiferent on this and everv other subject; but Marxians was easily in- d-jced to promise Catherine Mortimer, who had undertaken to persuade them, fo v her- *eif and her sister. She had various reasons for vieldirg ; she believed that Geneweve's dejection was encouraged by solitude, and was verv anxious for an opportunity of placing Lo«d v or„ u. n . Lothian
i.otliion before her in an tin favourable point of view. Th v re was y c t ;■ not! 1 rr con- sideration that actuated her almost ;js strongly as either of 'liese. It was possible, that by bringing Kthelred and Genevieve together more fvecjuently thisn they h;id hitherio met, they mi^Iif both, by thesi^ht <jf each -other, be released in lime fV^m their ])resent aitaeliments. Genevieve mi^ht in¬ sensibly be.led to compare ihe excellencies of Winhurne with the abandoned princi¬ ples of Lord Lothian ; and Winburne to prefer the more docile Genevieve to the insensible Margiana. Induced by these reasons* she won her sister's consent to obey the princesses, and soon after went with her to court, where their loveliness and grace excited admira¬ tion, while envy was repressed by ihe gen¬ tle modesty -of their deportment. The Prince of Wales was heard to wish them the daughters of some foreign potentate ; and even the King, in years as he was, ap¬ plauded
v h\xded their beauty. Ethelred gazed on ? banana in uleased, yet thoughtful siienrc, bu: Wallop seemed debghted at the praxes ],.- hi a*'d lavished upon her; and Lord j -■;, : . l i af/cctcd a transpeii at s-e"n4 her n, a.* *i ".o \s:i/. an ab-.MHC, thrt she **-,:' "n >'i»t to hoi o.--u*r. ■• w^^o,^^ d'r^po^er of ns heart. a*vl / - ,r t^ot/ii/'cula'.-u-tl he, '• iia\e ^ ,-: ,, -J/'^'l t> bla/,e upon us for *>o . i - i- ; '.»">\is « i!v to urovc who could and ' ' :\ K t{ '/ * uith')ur vou ?" - .■:.,>!!*•' I ii 'r t ei\c/ sj;d he,^m ; .bn ■, - ', -,. y | |, ,*- onlv b: ^r. restor-'d > j :i>* .; ' v. it nvni. Tdi that bie^;\i . .-.-e/t i r".'*led, a\eL v Ctable stdvt .nee, ^\!. ; ;;/t ? 'uil.M^.i.}!!. ^ithowt o'-^ciT vt p:.r- ,-,':, Vo c 1^ iCu.a tttoem me a ratio md ** /h^\ could Ii.!\llv do th it before 1 •ac -it a»\av, my Lord.. You must bring *u ne ^tron^er i)iocf, before vou convince n:c of vour decease/' n 2 "W:.„l
" What stronger proof can your match¬ less erueltv desire ? When vour denarture, and my own grief, bereft me of all my senses, can vou either doubt mv love or deny me your pit v ?" " I am not sure but I can do both ; for when senses are so frequently upon the win<r, my Lord, as vour's are, it is not sur- prising if they take flight upon very trivial occasions/' He said she was very hard upon him, and asked her if she was equally severe with everybody else? " I must own I think not," replied she, " though at the risk of ofiendmg you ; and I am unable to assign a reason, unless it be that, by *the extravagance of your compli¬ ments, you lay yourself more open to what you call severe answers, than other people do." Ethelred, who, standing near Genevieve,, had heard this conversation, interposed, by observing, Margiana was unjust to herself, in making such a confession,—" For I never/'
never," pursued he, fi observed her more indukent to anv of her admirers than she js to Lord Lothian. Many of them might be brought forward :r, living witnesses n\ moot of what 1 sav. She talks of them ail A with equal indifference," i: That is because she never talks of her favourite/' said Lord Percy, who had ie- turned the week before from Northumber¬ land ; "and we will forsnve her for speak- O A ing slightly of all but him/' " Take care, my Lord Percy/* said Mar¬ giana ; (i Ethelred has the advantage over vou. He savs he can brine manv witnesses to prove what he advances; but you, though vou onlv require one, will never be able to find him/* " That is of no consequence at ali," re¬ plied Hotspur,— ff I am convinced he ex¬ ists somewhere; and it is not necessary I m should betray the secret of his name or his abode/' " But how came you to be so very well convinced, cousin Henry ?" said Ethelred d 3 f( Your
'• Yowr extreme certainty is .sufficient to i."C:.\v iu*. suppose somcthinj.: vtrv flattering IO \.-' , -!\Cif/' ** A:u! thi' more l:':;t tering \t is, the more *'<-icome \ou are to si^uct it. cousin * A Wit/r.:in::\ !>:;{ I ^h:il! lie dra^vincr \;!ij' env\ u:;on n-e, 1 \'.m\. Hi >av u i .uih r^orc '.-.' : th.roiu.vh the bod*", ii' 1 vas kii'nsn to be i/e l'.M'tunate '.'onouxrer of ladv Mar.^i- -..UiV ! .'rv; 11*':• i.tcct hcait? Yet 1 fancv, too, A * * «- -ft * * r - • J - 1 . • f \ r<\tM' ' * / * j I ; i '\\ t * ) * | f * \ p *^ ^ -( } C W 1 f iA*\ CtttU in*; f , iibul tk -;t itl\ **.*•» 11 i (.(u 1 ) *./!**- d;;V- and fu/k-v me to v-u*s for your favoured !o\er/' " ! foar I should excite some onw then," said A!^ir"i:inn, gLiiiciii-x her eve towards ('athcrine Mortimer. " Indeed you would/' observed Wallop, " You hnd bet'er let me personate the harpy mortrd. N":.'«odv can dispute my prc:cruior? to l:e a ;::;!y's favourite/' *• And besides, harotd/' said Lord Percy, «■ vou would scare away all vour rivals." » *
u And the lady too, unless she was blind. ' v.'hispered ' f -iA Lothian to Margiana. — - * l ./'jt wild," (ontinued he, aloud, and tuiii- in-;- to Generic se, il \.-ho siiall contend for thi-j Lair prvii- ? .\(ust i be clebicred iviy-w every ones rood irraccs, or will \Ois. 5^ i ntic it oi -:;':V ;, act! tlf me io vour lavour, i* . : 1 i V * i i dl -stall iy hr, ;! VM ^ v v 1 1. 1 o i ^ * , v;j'J, to the !,-.>teut sneils of 1,'ar^/d Vv:.-.-- lop ?"' He would have taken her hand, bnt ia extreme confusion site withdrew it. She blushed and trembled : while he, as if not observing her, continued in the same Sight strain.—" Believe me, no one is aware of half my value, because I do not possess the fortunate talert of shewing myself on to advantage, like sedatcr characters, who march by rule and measure, and wei^n every word before they utter it. What chance has a lady for happiness with such a machine? Vie may deceive her in an hundred ways; while an honest man, such a* I am, never wishes to appear better than n 4 he
really is. 1 Lave a (houoa.ul good qualitieSj if the truth was knov;n/' " But how should it be known," said Wallop. ' when you are at such pains to conceal it? How can you expect to be credited for good qualities that you never sufter to appear t" <f They lie deep/' said Lord Lothian.— "' I disdain to let them float upon the sur* face of my character/' fi So deep," observed Margiana, ** it re* quires a spirit of divination to know they are there/' " Or second sight/' said he, " Oh no, my Lord ; a first glance is quite sufficient to satisfy any one/' While this was passing, Genevieve's eyes were cast downwards; but once raising them, and observing those of Wallop fixed upon her, she suffered them to fail again to the ground.—Catherine Mortimer said something to her, in a low voice, at which she
she looked pleased, but returned no an swer, ''Hear!" exclaimed Lord Lothian ; — i( hear, all ye compassionating spirits, how this fair inexorable treats me, and proclaim her injustice ! Bear witness for me how I lamented her absence, and what oceans oi tears it cost me ! About three months ago, when I was very desperate indeed, I would have uiven awav a diadem for her comina up to London onlv for asiu»1eday, to have relie\cd me by her presence/' li It would have been a lone- journey/' said Wallop, " for any one to take, only just to let you look at them." " Not so verv long. My sister Rothes once rode lifteen miles only to see a calf with six legs." Cf But a calf with more than four," said Ethelred, " is a rare sight." " And so Lord Lothian will sav he is also," observed Wallop, " if he has a mind io pay a compliment to the human species." n 5 This
This was not said in an ill-natured tone ; however, Lord Lothian looked so much disposed to take offence, that Margiana ad¬ dressed some words to him, to engage his attention; and the Prince of Wales com¬ ing'up to them, the discourse took a dif¬ ferent turn. The Prince was followed by a young man so remarkably handsome, that as he passed along, he drew every eye, even from thf* heir apparent himself; and Margiana, to whom he was entirely a stranger, asked her sister if she knew who he was ? Gene¬ vieve replied his name was Scroope ; and thereby raised a train of ideas in her mind, hv awakening the recollection of Lord Latimer's death ; and she determined, when thev should be next alone, to ask Gene- \zevc seme questions upon the subject, which had never recurred to her memory ^iuce her return to London. She was not surprised that a woman of Lady
Lady Rothes's disposition should have dis- tinguished a youth of such uncommon personal attractions as Scroopc ; and hear¬ tily wished that he, instead of her father, had the prosnect of obtaining her hand.— His behaviour was very modest and unas- sumln'-. and he seemed much in the favour of the Prince of Wales, who paid more at¬ tention to him than to many others of the highest rank. Nothing co;Jd be rr.cve gracious than tr.e behaviour of the kimj and the Prin- cesses towards Margiana and her sister.— They im>cd them to return often to the. palace, ana expres-eu niueii satislaction at the idea of seeing Lord Widdrington soon at court. But all these honours were lost upon the melancholy Genevieve. She re¬ ceived them with silent respect, and her thoughts seemed far from home. Mar'» i i- ana was amazed, while she lamented the change in her character; and wondered vyhat she could ever have discovered in J j u Lord
Lord Lothian to excite her admiration.— She was astonished, also, at her late dupli¬ city, when writing of him, and, in fine, knew not how to reconcile so many incon¬ sistent improbabilities. Whenever he hap¬ pened to be engaged in conversation with Ethelred, Margiana endeavoured to draw her attention that way, that she might be led to make comparisons between them ; for Ethelred had as much the superiority, in point of figure, as in sterling and in¬ trinsic worth. At length Genevieve, who appeared to be exhausted, and weary of the scene, be¬ came anxious to retire ; and Margiana, just then, chancing to observe Lord Lothian engaged in a gay conversation with a very handsome young lady, was at no loss to conjecture whv the place was suddenly grown more disagreeable than before.—>She readily consented, however, to leave it; and as soon as they reached home, re¬ quested (Senevieve would relate to her the particulars
particulars of the scene at Windsor on the evening previous to Lord Latimer's death. Genevieve complied without hesitation or embarrassment; but her recital threw no new lights upon the subject. She simply said, as Wallop had before stated, that hav¬ ing loitered behind Henry Percy and her friend, Catherine Mortimer, to observe the play between Lord Lothian and Lord La¬ timer, the former, when it was over, had accompanied her into the castle; the latter, on being asked, refusing to go with them, saying he would stay out awhile longer, to enjoy the fineness of the evening. She saw no more of either of them. Lord Lothian immediately withdrew upstairs, to his own apartment; she did the same; and the next morning was informed the unfortu¬ nate Latimer had been found in the grove beyond the green, severely wounded, and quite dead ; his sword, stained with blood, lying by his side. *' Poor man !" said Margiana.—" His senses
senses must have been deranged. Had he never before discovered any marks of in¬ sanity ?" " None that I know of," replied her sister. fi lie had been out of humour, in the course of the evening, at some expressions Lord Lothian had used respecting Lady Rothes ; but his resentment had entirely subsided, and thev parted very good friends. lie was alwavssubject to violent starts of passion ; arid probably to one of those his rashness ought to be attributed. besides, it was said that he was in a state of intoxication ; and I believe that was really the case." No news were vet received of Lord Wid- drington ; end his daughters began seri¬ ously to wonder at Lady Rothes's long de¬ lay. Both Ethelred and Wallop had men- tioned to them the report Queen Isabella had noticed : but Margiana coidd. not be persuaded to believe it; and Genevieve ap¬ peared wholly indifferent whether it was true or false, t( Your
" Your s:->tcr/' said Wallop, one day to J/argi.ma, (( seems to have made up her mind to be miserable, and not to care what happens. It is a pity she cannot be re¬ moved frojn hence, where she is in the way ol'seeing Lothian every time she stirs from borne. If Lord Widdrington really is married, or does marry that bold woman, I see not that vou could act more advisably than in accepting the Queen's invitation to France ; and my counsel is very disin¬ terested; for what would become of me without you, in this town, where you are the oulv ladv who has cool courage enough to look me in the face, much more to speak to me r" " I wish," replied Margiana, hardly hear- in *r his last words, Ci I wish to Heaven Genevieve had taken a liking to you, in¬ stead of Lord Lothian 1" Wallop fell a laughing at her serious tone.— " I fear/' said he, " her choice would not have been much more admired than it is at present; and, to tell you the truth
truth, her preference would not have been any better requited than it now appears, since vour return, to be. Shall I own to you a secret ? 1 hate mysteries amongst friends. Perhaps you would not suspect { am a little in love myself in another quar¬ ter/' fr Really !" replied Margiana.—" I con¬ fess you do surprise me; but I am glad to hear it; for though I cannot fall in love myself, I think it is very fair other people should. I hope your mistress is sensible of your affection ; and I have no doubt of her being worthy of vou/* te Mv mistress does not know so much of my affection as I have told von in these few words. She is shut up in the black tower, at Widdrington Castle, where she sings, dances, and plays pranks like a fairv. enchanted in a magic circle." " Good Heavens ! do you mean Ethel- red's sister ? Is it my cousin Arlette you are in love with ? And have you any hopes of obtaining her ?"
MARGIANA. e( No more than 1 have hopes of obtain- in «■ you. Yet I cannot, for my life, for- get her. I have Ethelred^ and his mo¬ ther's good wishes, I know ; but what can »hcy avail me, while Bertram lives ? I hate him; and, for any thing I can tell to the contrary, he may hate me ; for there never is a chance of guessing at his real senti¬ ments on anv subject. In the meantime, I love on ; and the remembrance of her dear little figure preserves me from every other impression. But when you, my friend, and now mv confidante, are gone, what can I do in this strange place ? I must hurry Ethelred back to Northumberland, and we will have a touch at the Scots, and light for it." " You speak as if our going was cer¬ tain," said Margiana j ff( whereas, I hope there will be no occasion for it; and that what Ethelred mentioned to my father at Edgehill, concerning Lady Rothes's former behaviour, sunk too deep into his mind to be either forgotten or overlooked/' " Pray
ef Pi-av IIea\cn it rr-ve so!" r,.M>ii.- i Wallop.— " Ycvs ir.u-it lic;;r son.-cthing o\ hirn soon. ?-/ra : .i\vin!e, p-ieserve r>v . c ecsvt, ;:'id, i will do the t'rime by vou, when yoii t^ * * / i ' " I * * \ {/ Jv'- U', j* '♦1 <*■ * 1 • if" ' 1 t J * * r * u ; _ 11 *. v. * il i,;,j id 1J j , j * ^ >i • i * n * ? * * i - * The next even in t» she was made hapnv, bv the arrisal of an express from her fa- tijer, who acquainted her that Lady Kothes a;;d hJmr-elf wore to bey,:n their sournev the dav after that on which his letter was V t w'iifen, ^iit tl.:it thev tihouid he som<* tiu.e on the road, as Lady Kothes \uis onlv al--!e to iriwel hv very ca;;v staves. Ife said h.'r general health was precarious, and her situ- ati;;n peculiarly niarming, and that she her¬ self was verv apprehensive of the event oi hei approaching confinement. Ii»s stile was hurried and unconnected ; but h.c ex¬ pressed all his usual af/ection for hh daughters;
■r'i i i * ; /"i * , ■ ■ * t ,' " ■»
r,>^)^ ! WU"H
ilrCIANA, d.T.ighters ; imd even Genevieve see?:ieu to rc*»oice in t!u-j;ro'.pect ofseei.i;; :,im again •o soon. t:n tee iourtu day ,.o r.rr;*\ :■/ •:*.{ !us ..v. u hous?, h:ivin t » iirstsre". L-.dv ['.'>'/.e.-> :-.;■/o at Li U Ui till !hl , 4 . - t i , v * -'u i . ^. s. * * *. - * * i - * i i!Ch i!U Uv ,^/f i;KM/.K df.^i * - \'^*'^*.- .v with a pensive pio:s< vie. i.\.\\. ,\\.\\<.i<xi-i\ itruguling to d/piry itself tltroj^h the shade of sorrow improved on her beautiful features. When ihe fell, half fainting on he? father's neck, fnr the \c?M emotion a]- mo.f oven jwer hi Iut nervous frame, he \-)o\e\ at her with .s'.:k>mn'% oh erved she w-;s i-rown much thinner t*i.**:; wl.on !:ehad seen her last, a.id kissed her ^ifh an air of compassion, that ey pressed a very different sentiment from what he felt for Margiana, whose steady principles, and fine under* standing, lie really respected, lie desired they would shew every nt* tcntion in their power to Lady Kothes, during
ilnring her present danger; and they each readily promised to obey him. However, Margiana determined to take the first op¬ portunity of naming: to her father the re- port she had heard ; and it was not ion a before he himself presented her with one. Lctuming one morning from lord Lo¬ thian's, he met Margiana repairing thither, to see Lady Rothes.— u Do not go yet," said he, stopping her, —" I am just come from thence. Lady Rothes has had a very restless night, ^nd is now fallen into a pro¬ found sleep. Defer your visit till the af¬ ternoon/' Margiana, upon this, turned back, and accompanied her father home. He scarce¬ ly spoke a word all the way. They found no one in the apartment thev commonly used ; and Lord Widdrington sat down, contrary to his usual custom, for he was generally abroad all the mornings. IIis look bespoke much uneasiness. He pressed hi*
his hand against his forehead ; rose, walked about the room, and then sat down again ; his eves fixed on the irround, Margiana knew not whether she ought to .speak at such a moment; but he, suddenly looking at her, beheld her affectionately gazing at him.-—" Margiana !" said he, and paused, '•"What, mv dearest father?" " My beloved child, I am nnhapyjy, and I know you will do all you can to alleviate my distress. Many things perplex and dis¬ turb my mind. Some I ought not, and others I am unwilling to name." " I am sure, my Lord, you do not doubt my desire to fulfil, to the utmost, what I owe you, ta i -k me as vou will. Where even duty failed, love would lead me on to obey you." " I believe you, Margiana; but you yourself seem thoughtful and perplexed.—■ If you haveany burthen on your mind, be candid; speak without reserve. I have al¬ ways been your friend as much as your father.
father. What are vou afraid of?" con¬ tinued he, observing she hesitated. e( Oh, my dear father, since vou com- maud me to be .•.•iuccre, I will confers I have heard a report since I left Edgehill, which, though I do not believe it, give; me pain Yet IIea\en is :»u r witne^, on vour a- count, not on mv own or my sister':;, ! should re arret it's bein.'r well ioiiiide-L" " W T hat report, Maririarsa ?" " Indeed,'mv Lord, I hardly dare to t/J vou, encouraged bv vour coodiicm as ( am. Yet sutler me, without i;K";.:rr/r> your anper, to •:i\\\ I hope mv father \\/; never ra-ddv commit an action of v. hie/i he may repent/' " Mannana/** said Lord Wlddrir.^t.r- <€ I hope this everlasting prudence of vour will prove a blessing to yourself. If ev«. you marrv, it will be either that or a cur-e to your Iiusband. Yet I oiuvht not to re- sret it. Perhaps vou will soon have need of it all, for vour sister, as well as yourse'f. i O
To her I shall never irive any advice. She ha; Margiana and the prophets. Let her listen to thoin. Your counsels will be •wire i^ir r ( n 'Mvp t'.an mine, for thev will L:'- ?■::' ';"';/- •. \1 hv example " l - Oh, mv dear Lord, if is f\)r both of us ^ * r t i < I : i ' i v ; -> i , ' * J f i. t i J t t, Vu-ii u.'v tlliU i*U> K*C * v a. i \u I .. ■ ; . J" «, i jhu .....^-------* " You need n■> vi'id'-'atiiiU. lam not P-'- :,vr;!!HM:s, :;"/ I will be unrescrsrd v : t!i vou in r.'uni, W! ; at was the re¬ port ?'"' 1 ■>' ^^ I 1 * n f T 't.-l v • ? r * i "* j^q '■» T> Q I ^ C t^ il. ?^ t* I V*^ * r 1 1 v 1 n ' I t A :tU > ilbltiO MUO ' * t i I j f' J I > c* t'. ; y n^;i./'Cil ?1ms I.;;>t summer, r t t Iv/i^^riiU/* " v To vour iat/n/rr" — Margiana was *' it is false; she was not. There was a time when she had drawn a magic circle around me, and the lovers of Circe were not more sulrjugoUd than I ; but I am not, nor ever wiii be, her husband. She shall never ha'ie dominion over you. Never¬ theless, at such a time as this, do not with¬ hold
hold from her anv allcvjaiion your aiten- tions, and those of Genevieve, can bestow. And if her offspring lives, and if you lose vour father, watch over and protect it, should it be neglected bv its mother." Margiana kissed his hand, in token of acquiescence. He embraced her tenderly. " I ^vould open my heart still more to vou," he added ; ts but I should not be V justifiable in so doing. Receive my bless¬ ing, and let me ha\e your prayers in re¬ turn. You have discretion enough to steer both yourself and your sister steadily through life, even should you be left with¬ out a parent; and while she continues un¬ married, you will not Iea\e her. I wUb vou may in time favour the pretensions of vour cousin, for he would make vou happy, unaccountable as you are. But whether vou do or not, never reside at m Widdrington Tower; you would not be at ease with a man of your uncle's character." " Alas ! my father," said Margiana, " why do you talk thus ? Why should either of
of us reside but where vou are ? Some fatal secret I fear there is, which ydu dare not disclose/* " Ne more!" replied he.— " Let our con¬ versation end here. The will of Heaven niu;t be accomplished ; and it is your duty, as well as mine, to meet it with fortitude mid resignation. We may live together rnaiy years in happiness, audi hope' we snah. lie then r.Trun embraced her, and ouifted the apartment, leaving her fearful of some ^ppro^chin;^ ev°nt, but wholly at ease re- specHn-r Lady Kothes ; for her father's "a* ord -die kuew to be sacred. She nc- ^u.v.- x .t:d Ethelrcd and Wallop with all that part of'his conversation which related io her ; and the pleasure thev expressed tcs- tilled tlieir friendship.---Geuevie\e onlv said—'' Since voii was jo averse to 1/idv ilothcs becoming a member of our family, t am glad your fears arc removed/'—She seemed nowise alfccted bv any thin«r that * rt i- n. p was
was passing, around her, but.t avoided all company ;*and as she now? ne^er by any, chance, mentioned Lord Lothian's n.inje, largiana began to hope she v^as growing
99 &&4*
gling to subdue it. A. few. days after, Lady ^otlies had a son. Contrary to the expectation of all the per¬ sons about her, her life was saved ; but her recovery was so slow and uncertain, that it long continued to be despaired of. The little boy was christened by the Saxon name of Hengist; and no person, how¬ ever charitably disposed to think as favour¬ ably as possible of its mother, could be¬ lieve it to be the son of Lord Rothes, who had been dead considerably a?>ove thre§
*
CHAP. IV
A Mysterious Stranger* A treacherous calm now prevailed through¬ out the kingdom ;. and. none but the few concerned in raising it foresaw the impend¬ ing-storm. At length the King's long-ex¬ pected removal to Windsor gave the signal for the conspirators to start inio action, and warily, but promptly, they began their operations. Lord Widdrington's deportment gave no suspicion in his own family, till one even¬ ing, when he took leave of > his daughters £ for
& ***
for the night, with more of tender solem¬ nity than usual; and .the next morning, old Kendrew, apparently equipped for an expedition, entered the hall "where they were at breakfast, and presenting a letter to Margiana, instantly withdrew, without speaking a word; after which, mounting his horse, which was in readiness at the gate, Genevieve saw him ride away at a swift pace, while Margiana read her letter. ft was from Lord Widdrington himself, and contained these few words:— "" A line to my beloved Man?iana and her sister I cannot withhold from them, even at this moment of pertur¬ bation and danger. I go, my dearest children, to join a determined band of loyal subjects, resolved to approve them¬ selves faithful servants of God, and their King; and either to see Richard righted, mid this realm heed from the oppression of an
.Margiana. an usurper, or perish in the glorious at¬ tempt. London, now so peaceable, will, before to-morrow night, become a scene of tumult and uproar. Keep close, there¬ fore, within doors, till all be over, or I re¬ turn to you a^ain. I have, in the mean.- time, written to Ethelred and" Harold, though adherents of Henry's, to protect you both, in case of danger, - / "Farewell* and pray for our success ra¬ ther than for our safety v " Your affectionate father, <f WmnBlNGTON/* • % "* V '. ' * ' Severe was the shock felt by Margiana and bv Genevieve, at the dreadful certainty of their father being engaged in open and declared rebellion. During the former in¬ surrection, that ended in the fall of King Richard, they had feared for his life, it was true; but the cause in which he had then taken up arms was not only blameless, but % S honourable ;
honourable; and if he fell, his name added ooc to the glorious list of those who ex¬ pired in the defence of their reigning so- Yereign. His situation at present was very different. Success only could justify the undertaking : of the insurgents; and such was the prompt activity of Henry and his m ensures,^ that 'success was somewhat less than doubtful; W tJiey were defeated, the father "they Twed," tlie chief of their noble Louse, would stfffer anlnglorions, if not an ignominious death, branded with rebellion, stained wt$i treachery. Conscious, how¬ ever, that their sorrow could be of no avail, Margiana exerted herself, and ex¬ horted her sister to prepare for the event, whatever it might he ; and they determined strictly to observe their father's injunction i>f keeping at home; relying on their pre¬ sent painful suspense being speedily termi¬ nated. Of dissuading Lord Widdrington from hi$ purpose there was no chance, even had there been a likelihood of suc¬ ceeding ia tne attempt, for they found he had
had left London late on the preceding evening, and almost immediately after he had parted from his daughters. They heard nothing either of Ethelred or Wallop all that day. Both those young men were at \vThdsor with the King ; and the letters Lord Widdrington had written to them awaited their return to London, which he knew, from the action to be ha- zarded, must soon take place* While his daughters were undergoing all the terrors their filial tenderness could in¬ flict, he himself was hastening to the ap¬ pointed place of meeting, where he found most of the principal conspirators already assembled, with a body of five hundred men, at the head of which tney resolved to proceed immediately to Windsor, to seize the King, though the absence of the Earl of Rutland, son to the Duke of York, who had hitherro been one of the most zealous ©f their party, occasioned much misgiving £ 4t itv
in the minds of some; and their suspic ions were confirmed when, on reaching Windsor, thev found that the King, already alarmed by some secret intelligence, had sudden!) it treated to London. In fact, the Earl of Rutland, finding the conjuration was discovered by ins father, into whpse hands a list of the conspiratnrV tames had fallen, which had dropt froNi his own bosom, hastened instantly to Windsor, well knowing the Duke of York would, without delay, reveal the plot and at lived only just'in time to make the discouvy ■himself, ancf obtain the King's forgiveness, before his father appeared. Such was the alertness of Henry and his adherents, in this dangerous emergency, that the very next day he was at Kingston- upon-Thames, with an army of twenty thousand men, which the rebels, with their inferior number?, not daring to face, they dispersed themselves to recruit their strength
strength in th^se counties where they could command the greatest interest; and spread¬ ing a report that the captive monarch had escaped from prison, and would lead them on to battle, many joined their standard, and they encamped near Cirencester, tak¬ ing possession of that city; and several of the commanders (of which, however, Lord Widdrington was not one) establishing their head-quarters within U, But they guarded the avenues to it with so little vi¬ gilance, that one night the mayor found means to introduce four hundred men, de¬ voted to King Henry's cause, through the gates, which they bairicadoed, so as to ex¬ clude the troops from without, and thereby m^de an easy prey of the foes they had en¬ closed. The Earls of Kent and Salisbury were seized by the citizens, and, according to the custom of Ihose times, beheaded without ceremony. The Lords Hunting¬ don and Speocev, with a few,others, escaped .over the tops of houses to the camp, hop- ittg yet to, ^tonn the town; but the sol- x, 5 dieis.
diers, dtsfnaved at the apprehension of the King's troops being possessed of it, had fled with the utmost precipitation * ->nd the chiefs, abandoned by all their followers*, had no resource left but to pursue their example. Lord Widdrington, who-had continued in the camp, escaped; but Spencer, Huntingdon, and Lord Lumfey, were shortly after taken, with many others of the conspirators, and were put to death by command of the King, wha now re* turned to London; and declaring himself satisfied with the executions that had passed, affected to talk of clemency and' moderation. The metropolis, meantime, had'been in thatstate of riot and uproar which Eord Widdrington had forewarned'Hie daughters of. On the day Henry ha<£ escaped from Windsor, and* was levying troops to march to Kingston, crowds were seen in' every street, wildly running they knew not wm> ther, and all ws& tumult confusion, and dismay,
^Rstna^. Many thronged to the gates of the tower, where they believed Richard still lobe; add rmnty to the palace; some offering their services, and others threaten- ing to force the Kim£ from it's walls, and de> vote him to instant' destruction*. The gallant Hotspur, on this^ urgent oc¬ casion, acted with all the accustomed spirit of his family. Every avenue to- the court was in tuf n defended by himself,- Harold Wallop, andErhelred ; but to the two lat¬ ter alone was owning the preservation of Lord Widdrington's houses which a party of the furious mob, mad with 2eal for the. Lancastrian can^e, menaced to raze to the ground, fithelred, making.his" way, a* the head of a few followers, conveyed an ordfcr to the servants to make/ fast 1 die doors, and loudly declared he would sacrifice every drop of his blood, sooner than surrender hi* cousins, or their dwelling, tk> the rage of an inflamed' multitude. s 6 So
So resolute was his air, and his and Wal¬ lop's courage were so w T ell known, that an halt ensued ; and Ethelred no sooner saw the ringleaders deliberating, than, with great presence of mind, #nd aware of the generous character of an English mob, he raised his voice, and called out for the Ladies Winburne to appear. There was a sort of lorn; eld balcony iu the front of the house, from which two large folding doors opened upon it, and through these Margiana and Genevieve, who had heard him, were, by his command¬ ing tone, encouraged to advance. They stood behind a railing, exposed to the gaze of the softening crowd, who viewed them with mute attention. They were habited in deep mourning, which they had assumed immediately on their father's departure.— The most profound anxiety was stamped on Margiana's brow, and the beautiful Ge¬ nevieve was in tears. They both bowed without speaking; and for a few minutes their
their bebpidera jcontimtedas silent**, the grave. Lthelred seized the favourable crisis to work upon their minds. *' Look up yonder/' he exclaimed, his eyes spark- ]in# like fire, and bis complexion raised and fflowinjr with the emotions of his soul, ( * Look up yonder, and behold who are tha enemies ye threaten. -Shall it be said that young and defenceless women are the ob» jetts of your vengeance, while Henry and his palace, menaced v%ith ruin, need your protection ? Away, away*! let us hasten to defend the King ; and if these lovely ones should afterwards be in danger, we wilLre- turn and protect them at the hazard-of our lives/' " Aye/' cried Wallop ; " we will come back and fight like devils for them; if there be occasion/* The sudden transition from fury to ap¬ plause was as universal as instantaneous.— The populace caught Wallop's concluding words;—" and we, will figh* l&Q,devils for them '/*
! re~ec. crying out— €€ To the palace, to palace !" while others gave loud cheers to the two frightened sivters, and blest thenx lor chatming. creatures.. EtherVed Was now anxious fo lead the erowd forward, and waved his* hehnef in l^rewell io his-cousins, who bowed to him- with- an expression* of tender gratitude on- tf'.eir features, thaf more than'rewarded him for whaf m? had done ; and' again also tfiey Bowed to the'mob, who huzzaed them til! ey wefe out of sight of the house.
y such well-timed exertions as these, London* was soon' restored to a state of trtmouillitv; and after the defeat of the rebels at Cirencester, the spirit: of party seemed to abate in every quarter. The mg once*m"ore established himself in ap- rent security at court; and all those ose near connexions-had been concerned the &mstt thought* it' advisable to wait
i
for themselves, or to obtain his pardon for their guilty friends. Ethrfretf, who had informed his cousins of his uncle's" escape, recommended them by all means-' not t& omit the same attention; and thev, shud- derin«^ at the idea of thetr father winder- ing a proscribed exile, in hourly danger of being taken and massacred, and soon af- ter, still more alarmed by the report of the seizure and death of those Lords who had tied with him, were readily guided by such prudent and friendly advice. - . « « They presented themselves, therefore, at the palace, soon S^-tr the Mine's return, with throbbing hearts, extremeJV doubtful of the reception they should meef, and still clad in their mourning robes. As; with several other ladies, they were cross- ing an antichamber-on the ground floor, they saw Henry descending a*private* stair¬ case, in company with adisagreeabie*look* ing stranger of a mean appearance, and in
an unfashionable dress. They happened lobe the last of the paity they were with; and as soon as their companions had all passed on, the King, detaining the stranger, called them back, and spoke to them, but in such a way as made them believe he only wished to subject them to this man's gaze. With an expression of extreme curiosity, he peered at them both, his body bent to a fawning attitude, and a suppressed cunning in his eye, that indicated an assumed sup¬ pleness, as foreign to the real character as distinct from ail manly openness of mind. His visage was long and pale; and there was a malignant cast in his features, a leer- ing look, and a cringing bend in his figure, that excited in Margiana immediate and extreme disgust. u This is Lord Widdrinsrton's eldest daughter/* said Henry, slightly laving his hand on Margiana sarin. ■m ihe
The stranger looked at her : she bent her eves on the ground. •< Where is vour father, lady r" said he.« "fhc King prevented her reply.— 8 ' I be¬ lieve she does not know, but 1 will rely oil her word. Have vou heard from Lord Widdriuffton since he left London, Lady Margiana r M " Indeed I have not, my liege/' " Where do you believe him to be at present ?*' ' ' * ( He never revealed to us whhher it was his intention to retire, in case the rebels should be defeated; but probably Nor¬ thumberland would be his place of refuge/' " Do you stigmatise the party in whose cause he engaged with the name- of re* bels?" said Ilenrv, with a smile. " Certainly I do, my liege j it is their true name ; I can call them by no other/* " Then your father is a rebel/* " We grieve that he i»so/* . * «* The enquiry is immaterial, but, did vou
you know his intention before he quitted ou last ?" " No, my liege. We parted from him ■vcrnight, in perfect ignorance ; and the ext morning we found he was gone, and id left a letter for us, acquainting us with is purpose/'
ing looked at the stranger, whose d ali this time been fixed on Mar- Finding Henry observed him, he downwards, and altered the ex- f his countenance. Bowing to tnd, he asked if the King had any commands for him ? e/' replied the monarch, with nn ou mav retire
**s<
if
*
• B*
tranger bowed, with increased then wichdri
the antichamber, Henry, argiaiK/g hand, with a something
■something- like paternal tenderm?3s in hh manner, said to her—-" Do you like the appearance of that man ?" She paused for a reply, unwilling to speak falsely, and fearful of offending.-*- But without waiting for her answer-*- f < You are risrht," continued he—** he is a villain. If ever you see him again, mis* trust him." He then bade them proceed to the pre* «ence-chambcr, which he soon afterwards entered himself. Margiana's thoughts were cngroswd by what she had just seen and heard; she wa$ silent, absent, and perplexed; and there was no one to whom, by revealing her per¬ plexity, she could relieve it, for Ethelrcd and Wallop were just then absent from London. The King was too much surrounded by courtiers and suppliants of every descrip¬ tion-
fion, to ailbrd the hop? of obtaining any conference with him that day. The sisters., therefore, d" l -..t stav long at the palace, thoucrh encouraged bv as r.mch, and a3 fa- vourable notice from ::)} the branches of the roval family as usulL Kctuniing borne, thev snoke of the mvsterious stiMUf'er, and' wondered wh'* be could be, arid wfiv Ilenrv should !)ave brought them Koa^iduouslv under his observation. But vainly thev strove to guess on eiiher of these points; for as no circumstance ex*» isted to guide their suspicions to any par¬ ticular person, they had no chance of form- inff'a probable cot lecture ; and their fears Oft *^ were too much awake on the score of their father, to admit of their thoughts dwelling long on any other subject. They were in daily expectation of hearing from him ; and hoped, wherever he might be. that he would find means to dispatch Kendrew to acquaint them with Ins fate. It was not improbable that, after the final dispersion of his party, he might have taken ■shelter abroad ;
abroad ; and they were induced to belie-.e that was really the case, \>i\en, on the re- turn of Wallop and Kthelred to London,. the latter informed them he had received a letter from his father, wherein was no men¬ tion whatever of Lord Widdrington. However, as j. few da-.s more wore away, their anxiety inr routed, and it was redoubled bv the report of new disturbances havinr broken out in the North. Margiana dreaded lest her father, immoveable as she knew his principles :o be, should join -in any fresh insurrection, supposing him to be still in the kingdom; and she became extremely impatient to obtain a promise of the royal clemency, and that it .hould be made known to her father. After consult¬ ing, therefore, her two faithful friends, who were of opinion that every effort they could make ought to be strengthened by solicitations from herself, she ventured tp entreat an interview with Henry, who, readily granted her request, and received her,
her, not merely with condescension, but even with kindness ; for as soon as he un¬ derstood the nature of her petition, he scarcely suffered her to proceed, but ran- ing her from his feet, at whith she had fallen, he told Ke'r that her prayers had been prevented*:—" Your cousin Kthel¬ red/" said V. "' has already obtained from me all the assurances y6u can desire ; nor was it with difficulty I granted" them ; for I believe Lord Widdrington to have been actuated by motives much more honour¬ able than anv of the other nobles who en ■ o-aged in the same desperate undertaking. They were- all influenced by tlie meanest causes; disappointed avarice, mortified ambition, or mere versatility of mind, the childish fickleness of the mob always pant¬ ing for something new. Had th-y yester¬ day raised Richard again to the throne, to¬ day they would again have deposed him.— f "t what your father did, I believe, was U tme from principle. I consider him, therefore, as an honourable offender, and am
am desirous of winning over such a man to my cause, by clemency, because, once won, I know he will be faithful ever after. There is also another reason, but one which must always remain a secret in my. own breast, that urges me to forgive his crime. I pardon him, therefore; and vou may inform him, that-whenever he chuses to return to London, he shall be received by me as a man whose offence is no longer remembered/' Margiana, overpowered by the> sensa¬ tions so muJi goodness excited, was al» most incapable of making any replv. She said something about boundless gratitude, and would ha\c krsed the king's hand on her knees, but he foresaw her intention. and saluted her himself with the gallantry of a younger man. " But," pursued he, in a gayer tone than he had used before, " your acknowL de¬ ments ought not to he confined to inc.-— there
There are no less than three others, to whom vou are equally indebted, at least ; for if 1 onlv had the power to ensure your father's life, they had all the will, and were even more prompt than yourself in suing for it."—Then, calling a ]y.:«e — cf Go," said he, (i into the antichamber, and tell Lord Percy, and the two who are with him,' to come hither." Immediately that nobleman entered with the kind friends who had so warmly inte¬ rested themselves in Lord Widdrington's behalf; and Margiana, who was now more collected,.vaid every thing to her sovereign, and to them, that gratitude could dictate. though compressed in a few emphatic words. Just, however; as she was prepar¬ ing to take her leave, she recollected what Henry had said of her transmitting to her father the welcome news of his being for¬ given ; and declared herself wholly igno- rant where he had taken refuge. r * He
i( lie h at Widdrington Tower. He has been there some time/' said the King.— ({ Write to him this day, and to-morrow morning vour cousin shall provide vou a it m A * l rusty messenger, who will carry him your letter." She hastened home to obey this pleasing order, and cheer the pensive Genevieve, who had earnestly declined accompanying her to the palace ; and in the evening, Kthelred waited upon her with Wallop, to receive her commands. She renewed her thanks to them ; and thev cordially con- gratulated both the sisters on the amended prospect of their father's affairs ; Ethelrcd agreeably surprising them, by saying that the King had ordered him to go down into Northumberland himself, for the purpose of more safely escorting his uncle to Lon- don, in case any of the Lancastrian party should attack him with mistaken zeal upon h\< road, ■.'•'j. n. f " You
rf You see, lovely rebels as you are,'* cried Wallop, " that our good King never confers a favour by halves. He does not send his pardon three hundred miles to Lord Widdrington, to have him massacred at his entrance into London. Make such an example of mercy useful to yon, by imi¬ tating it yourselves ; and when next, Lady Margiana, my friend here entitles himself to your gratitude, grant him, as Henry grants you, more than he sues for, and throw a little love, over and above, into his reward/' tc Will you yourself," said Margiana, " be equally kind, and, to the obligations you have already conferred upon me, add one more, namely, your interest with my uncle Bertram to obtain one favour I would fain ask of him ?" " I would w«ih the utmost readiness, but I do not possess any influence over him
»«*• *'
fi I am satisfied. You cannot grant what
what is not in your power to bestow.—Nei¬ ther can I/' *' Ah i fair lady, how cunning you are * But I shall be angry with you if we fall upon this subject. A temper half so un¬ persuadable as your's would make me hate any body else," {i But if you hate Margiana, vou must fight with me," said Ethelred; " for I would have her beloved by every one, though I wish I loved her less myself." i>iargiana looked distressed and un- easy at ihcae words.— " Brother of my heart/' said she to Ethelred, " no more of this. All the preference I am capable of is your's; but I cannot perform impossibili¬ ties, and I believe a miracle only could render me susceptible of love." •'Oh that i could perform miracles!" exclaimed Ethelrcd.— 4i I would live seven years in a cavern, as a hermit, or walk a barefoot pilgrim to Jerusalem, Co obtain ihe blessed privilege ! But tell me, sweet cousin, for mv time is short, what is it you •" -' woi?Id
"would ask of my father. AH the interest 1 possess, I need hardlv say, shall be exerted for you, if yon will tell me how to employ it." * f In procuring his promise, my dear Ethelred, that he will forever burv in obli- vion all that has ever passed of unplea¬ sant between him and his brother; and that he will suffer you to be a witness of their entire reconciliation, so that you mav de- light me with the assurance of it when you return/* " I will do my utmost for that purpose/ 5 be replied ; " and I have no doubt what¬ ever of succeeding to your wish. Near relations may quarrel, but there h a some¬ thing in kindred blood that must reunite them when either is threatened with dan¬ ger. Farewell, mv charminq friend ; fare- well, mv dear Genevieve. In ten davs at the farthest, expect me back, and Heaven grant you a happy meeting with your be¬ loved father/' They
They all said amen ,* and the two sisters were left considerably more at et?sc than* they had been for many days before; though Margiana reflected, with uneasy surprise, on the mystery Bertram Winburne- had made, even to his own son, of Lord: Widdrington being with him.
■A- Nocturnal Visik
ScAHCEtY had Ethelred Winburne, the next morning, proceeded at the head of a small body of men, twenty miles on his road to¬ wards Widdrington Tower, when he met an express sent by the Earl of Northumber¬ land, with advices to the King, confirming a former rumour of new, but inconside¬ rable tumults, having been excited by some factions spirits in Yorkshire, the western side of Northumberland, and Durham.— The rebels, as the courier related, were as¬ sembling in the neighbourhood of Raby,
at tfte time principal object of which was to bring tack Lord Percy, the Earl himself be.ng indisposed, as well as Bertram Wmborne ;. and both at that period incapable of going forth to quell the insurgents, whose num¬ ber!, however scanty, were augmenting. every day. Ethelred delayed $& messenger no* longer than while he gathered these parti- aufers, and advised him to make what speeds he could, while he himself pursued his way, alike impatient to behold his uncle, whom fee Loved with a filial affection, to commu¬ nicate the welcome tidings he brought, a and to return to Margiana, whose perfections- of character, mind, and person, became more and more dear to him every hour. She, in the meanwhile, counted the days- of his absence, and at times almost petu¬ lantly bore the reproaches of Wallop, who, when he observed her impatience for his r 4 retuitn,
return, accused her of ingratitude for only r . feeling that impatience on her father's ac¬ count. r>ut the news brought by the Earl cf Northumberland's messenger turned their thoughts into another channel, and occa¬ sioned the in some consternation. . (< When Ethelred reaches the country where there is any fighting," said Wallop, *• be will not be able to keep away from it; and the Lord preserve King Henry's par¬ don,, if he joins in the affray 1" e< The Lord preserve my father out of the affray !" replied Margicna. *' If, hope¬ less, of being forgiven for what is past, he should have joined the.se new rebels before his nephew sees him, he will be undone.— It cannot be expected the King will restrain his resentment against any further of- ie-ncc. " We will hope for the best," said Ha- void.—." 1 trust your father would not be HO
so madly blind as to persevere to his own ruin, in so desperate a cause; and Bertram surely would do his utmc:>i to prevent him. Lord Widdrington's taking shelter in the fortress his brother commands, shews they are upon good terms. I have no fears upon this score," Margiana endeavoured to feel com¬ forted; and just then, happening to re¬ collect the mysterious stranger sue had seen at court, she mentioned the circum¬ stance to Harold, and related all that had i . ,.„ <v* nii"\';'tw He was sur¬ passed upon tkie ctutoiU.u * x - prised, and could not at all account for what had so much pe.--l-y.ed both her and her sister. He desired her to describe the man's appearance, which she did n«i accu¬ rately as was iu her power ; but he could not, "for some lime, recollect any cue whom the descrip/on resembled. 1 !e qi::*tioned her as to his dialect.— 4 ' He spoke so low," said she, " I could not dMingukh it." '■< His Manue""'and depoitment r"
w They were uncouth, yet conveyed the idea of being assumed." " And he had the air of being a depend¬ ant ? He seemed one more used to obey than to command ?" " Yes." " Then I think I know the man ; but as I cannot be sure, we will say no more about him. If really so, it would be most unac¬ countable. But it cannot be. Let us talk only of Lord Widdrington's return. We shall have news from the North very soon : and there is little doubt of its being fa¬ vourable. Hotspur set forward at half an hour's nolice, as cheerfully as if* all the preparations had not been made for his marriage. But he will have one more lau- re I to present to his fair bride at hh re- turn* He will disperse his feeble foes with a breath, send us an account of hie victory, and then come back triumphant With your father, and our noble Win¬ burne/' iC Heaven grant it4" replied Margiana, ^ith
%vith a deep sigh ; f4 but we have been so long under perpetual alarms for my be* loved father, that I shall never be able to persuade myself he is entirely safe, till we see him here in the bosom of his own. family/* Wallop assured her, that without being too sanguine, she might now look forward. to the enjoyment of that satisfaction in very ititle.more than a week> and promised, Mint he would be careful to bring bet the earliest intelligence that arrived, of what was posing in the North ; " whither/' said he, " i think-1 ought to have gone with Lord Percy ; but the King chose to detain . me here on business, that in my opinion , might as well have been attended to by any oilier person. However, I shall not regret hi*, fancy, if my stay proves ia any degree serviceable to. you," They now parted, and Margiana and Ge¬ nevieve went to sec Lady Rothes, a civility they seldom omitted, for more than two r 6 oi-
or three successive days. Nor was their so * doing thought reprehensible, notwithstand¬ ing ihe lishtncss of her character, when it was recollected how nearly she had been related to their mother, and how probable if waj> that her reputed connexion with Lord Widdrington would terminate, or had already terminated, in marriage. Such, af least, was the public opinion ; but th? fears of his daughters, on that head, had been entirely dispelled bv the few words lie had spoken to Margiana. Their love for him was, if possible, so much intrcr.ud l;y his absence, and his past, il nor i:Uwai (bmger, th:\i they now felt a pleasure in. paying attention to Lady Rothes; for as he had desired they would do se, it was like rendering a duty to him ; and besides, not doubting but that Li:1c Hen-dst was in fact their brother, they loved him with th:\t sort of natural affec¬ tion incident to good tempered and wel!- disposcd young women. Margiana, in a \ '■> «■ -1 I /"-1 ■ - r, ^ j J*A+ I * V it U»i j i
particular, had him continually in her arms, while Genevieve, who was a greater fa¬ vourite with Lady Kothes than herself, de¬ voted more time to her than to the child.. AM, however, that either of them could do, seemed received rather as a right tha:> as a favour. If their visits were long and. freouent, it was well. Thev amused her while she was so strictly confined as to be unable to admit other guests, whose society she would have preferred to iheir's ; but if thev omitted waiting noon her a dav lon;:er than usual, they were often ones*. ticned as to the disposition of iiieir time ; i-nd escn occa.Nionally reproaclied, in a manner they could not conceive she had any right to assume, It is true, the gcntlo tiniidiiy of Genevieve had, in some de¬ gree, gained upon the selfish and hard na-» ture of Lady Kothes; but there.was an in-? depeudance of character belonging to Mar- giana, a noble candour, and a superiority of understanding that secretly rendered her the
tiie object of her aversion ; though, in or* €ler to ascertain her not being with Lord Lothian, Ladv Rothes would willin-glv have engrossed all her hours. Lord Lothian was at this time about the court, and rarely in his own house, except during the periods of rest; for when Mar¬ giana was there, he knew she wholly con- lined herself to his sister's apartment, where the latter took care never to admit him, when he might see the person she wished for ever to separate him from. He often and invariably declared to Lady Rothes that he never would marry any woman but Margiana Winburne; and professed, even while he was apparent!v trifling with them, rite most profound indifierence for ali others* not excepting the lovely Genevieve herself/ whose partiality for him he was told of from every quarter but her own. To keep him from Margiana, therefore, was a study to which Lady Rothes bent her unremitting:
unremitting attention; and as he had been repeatedly threatened with attacks of a consumptive nature, this unfeeling sister argued with herself, that if she could but prevent his marrying for a few years, his early death would probably ensure to her¬ self and her son, the young Earl of Rothes, who still remained in Scotland, a conside¬ rable addition of property, which habitual extravagance was likely to render very ac¬ ceptable to her. The design she medi¬ tated, therefore, was to obtain, by marry- ing Lord Widdrington, besides an honour¬ able establishment for herself, such an au¬ thority over bis daughters, that she might, if circumstances required it, take the elder; under a shew cf civility, down into Scot¬ land, where the remote situation of Rothes Castle, built on a barren rock far to the North'of Edinburgh, might effectually se¬ cure her from the pursuit of Lord Lorfnan, whose constancy, she did not doubt, would in time have its due'weight with his hitherto insensible mistress. Margiana's persever*
ins: rciection of Ethelred convinced Lady Rothes that she was not so indifferent to Lord Lothian as she pretended to be ; for, fudging of Margiana's character by her own feelings, she supposed it utterly impos¬ sible that she should refine, the hand of a fine voung man of Ethelred"s expectations, unless ?he was secretly inOuenced by a pre- possession in favour of some other person. During this interval of expectation and hope, mingled with many apprehensions, Margiana.-was pleased at observing that her sister did not appear at all solicitous to throw herself in Lord Lothian's way.—She even some limes fancied she saw a dawn 'A returning cheerfulness gleaming through her dejection-; but it resembled the faint and momentary struggles of moonlight^ overwhelmed by watery clouds. Kthelred had been gone nine days from London, and no intelligence had yet been received from Lord Percy; though it was nidged
judged he must have collected a sufficient number of his fathers vassals to have al¬ ready made head against ihe malcontents* Whenever Margiana and her sister saw Wallop approaching, their hearts beat with an undeiinable sensation; and they watched his countenance before they dared to ask him what news he brought But news he had none ; and the tenth and the eleventh day passed over, in blank and painful expectation, On the morning of the twelfth, they re- ceived from him these few lines;
te Late last night a mes¬ senger from Lord Percy arrived at the pa¬ lace. A skirmish, for it cannot be called an action, has taken place near Raby; and the rebels are so completely dispersed, that their defeat must prove final. None of note are killed; nor do I hear that an.v
©f that description were engaged on tk& side of the insurgents. i£ In a private letter to myself, Lord Percy informs.me he had heard of Ethel- red's arrival a week %go, at Widdrington Tower, from a person who had just left thai neighbourhood, and that he meant to se! oitt from thence on Friday last. This even¬ ing, therefore, he will certainly be in Lon¬ don ; and not having it in my power to wait upon you with this news at present, I will make free to visit you towards the close of day, ia welcome Lord Widdring¬ ton home. , " Your faithful servant, « H. Wallo»."
Delighted by this welcome intelligence, Margiana gave way to the liveliest joy, and felt as if there was not any thing more in the world for her to wish for. She strove to inspire Genevieve with her own cheer¬ fulness,
fulness, m& in some measure succeeded; for there was such a radiant glow of hap¬ piness on her expressive face, as if was hardly possible to look at without partici¬ pating. " He is already only a trifling distance from us/* exclaimed she; " and I know he is as impatient to embrace us again as we are to behold him. Oh, my dear sister! what a joyful meeting H will be !'* "But it isji long time til! evening/* Saict Genevieve.- <* It is very early yet. We shall have several tedious hours to wail still." "Oh no,sister, they will not be tedious; We have the certainty of seeing hirn at last, that makes us amends for all our past suf¬ ferings, and renders every present moment delightful/' " It is pleasant fo see you so happy, 1 * said Genevieve, with a faint smile. "Many people would give you credit for looking forward rather to the return of vour lover than
MAKGIAKA. than of your father, *nd are you quite sure Ethelred might not claim some share in your present joy ?" " Indeed he, would claim more than his due. If my father was returning nlone, I should be equally happy. Consider that, till within this hour, *we knew not when, or if ever, we might see him again/' Thus Margiana talked, when not cm* ployed in giving household directions re¬ lative to the wished-for event of the even¬ ing. She had no time to go to Lady Rothes, or even to think of her. If she left the house for an instant, her father, during that instant, might arrive, and she would not but welcome him on the thresh¬ old, for the %vor!d. When she fancied every necessary order was given, she sat down at the window, to watch his coming. till, recollecting something else she had forgotten, she again started up, too happy for repose. Wallop*
%Vallop found her in this state of joyful perturbation when he came at the time he had mentioned. <{ My sister has been thus all day/' said Genevieve, who was sitting quietly at her needle-work.—-" She has not taken a mo¬ ment's rest since your letter came this morning/' " That is right/' cried Wallop.—" This " i not a time for rest. Put up your work, /or shame. Your father must be about entering London now. The sun has been set above an hour/' '•' Do you imagine/' said Margiana, in some alarm, (e that he, or that Ethelrcd judged it expedient he should enter the town after it grew dark ? Is there reason to ap¬ prehend he would incur any danger by keingsecn ?" * f Oh no ! f had no view to that, in what I said. I only sp»ke from having -calculated the time they would be upon v A the road since last Friday, Fray k Lady Rothes
Kothes acquainted with Lord Widdring¬ ton *s expected return this evening ?" if I must confess I never once thought of her the whole dav/* replied Marjriana. u She is ignorant of it, unless you have taken any means to inform her/' " Not I, truly ! I have thought of her no more than you have, since I received Percv's letter. But it will be all in good lime to¬ morrow morning. I am heartily glad she is not well enough to stir out, or we should have had he£ here now/* In disjointed conversation thev wore away two hours ; for Wallop and Margiau.'x were too much discomposed to talk cohe< rentlv, or even to sit still for above a few minutes at a time; when at length, as they were beginning to think the travellers verv late, a loud trampling of horses' feet was beard in Hie street. They all three has- m teued to the door* It was a party of about twenty horsemen; and Margiana's arms were already extended to embrace her fa-
ther, when the leader, by the light of some torches, borne by his followers, observing Harold Wallop, advanced towards him, at the same time taking off his cap, and dis¬ covering the features of Lord Percy. " Welcome back, my dear Lord/' cried Wallop, "though you are not ihe man we expected to see. We give you joy of your victory; but have you seen or heard of Lord Widdrington and his nephew ?" " I belie^e them to be a few miles be- bind me/' replied the Northern chief.—- *' A man overtook us awhile ago, who said be had passed a small number of men, of martial appearance, upon the road/' Lord Percy then saluted the two sisters, as they were rctiiing into the house, in disappointment; and telling Wallop he would have further talk with bin. the next day, he rode forwards, while Harold fol¬ lowed Margiana and Genevieve into the apartment the) had quitted. " Two
r( Two hours more/' said he, as he im¬ patiently traversed the room ; " tsvo hour; more, and they will be here !" tf Alas !" observed Margiana, <: the horse¬ men mentioned to Lord Percy might not be them. If w t c should be disappointed after all, and not see them to-night!" " Do not talk so wickedly, Lady Mar- o-iana. It is impious to harbour such doubts/* f! I rather wonder," said Genevieve, (( that Ethelred, who is always so considerate and attentive, should not have sent a messenger forward before now to apprize us of their near approach/' This remark made both Margiana and Wallop look grave ; but he soon rallied hU spirits, and rattled so gaily, that she could not but feel re-assured. As soon as he per¬ ceived he had dissipated her fears, he began to talk of Ethelred, and good humouredly abused her, as he had so often done before, for what he called her vile stoicism; tell- JUL'
ins her that had she lived in ancient times, she would either have shamed the philo* sophers of old, by outdoing them all, or have been, like the coy Daphne herself, metamorphosed into a laurel. As the night, however, advanced, his gaiety, becoming less natural, grew more noisy. Involun¬ tarily he felt alarmed; and to conceal his secret apprehensions of Lord Widdring¬ ton's having been set upon by his enemies, he forced an appearance of high spirits, very foreign to the real state of his mind. Weary at length of his raillery, and sicken¬ ing with fears, Margiana begged he would be quiet ,* and Genevieve, fairly over* powered, ncrvouslv burst into tears, and left the room. " What have I done!" cried he, very much surprised.— f( Have I been too rough for that fair lily of the valley ? I am quite ashamed of myself" *' f Indeed you have some cause to he so/' .rplied Margiana.-—"' You have been ex- voi.tr. & tremely
tremely tiresome, it must be confessed, though I know your motive was a friendly one. But the least vou can now do, to de- serve our pardon, is to go quietly away ; for you find it is grown so late, there is scarcely any chance of seeing my father to¬ night. To-morrow, if you have leisure, bestow it upon us, and w T e will thank vou." " But if I leave vou now, my sweet friend, you will indulge a thousand fright¬ ful fancies, and think of nothing but Lord Widdrington." {t I should think of nothing eise, if you 'staid. Besides, if you will not leave me, I must leave you ; for I really wish Jo be with my sister." She held out her hand, and was bidding him good night, when a servaift suddenly entered, and told Wallop a man in the great hall wantsd to speak with him. " The great hall is very cold," said Mar¬ giana ; t( conduct the man into the next room, where there is a fire." " Some
" Some messenger from Ethelred, I hope*'said Wallop.—He hastened out>nd for above a quarter of an hour Margiana waited alone, in a state of breathless sus¬ pense. Through the crevices of the pan- nels that divided the neighbouring apart¬ ments, which were hung with loose arras, /;ie heard Wallop speaking in a low tone, but it was with difficulty she at all dis¬ tinguished the voice of the stranger. Her anxiety amounted to anguish. There was a small door communicating with the room they were in, concealed by thehan"i n .rs .... >he approached ir, to hear if her fathers n.;»nc was mentioned, and meaning to re- *H-'"!t if <v,r; liquid the) were conversing cm any other subject. As she drew near, theie -.«s a pause in their discourse, Wallop hroke it. t( This dreadful news/* said he, ** will break their hearts to a certainty/* Margiana, whose blood ran cold as Ice, •:oftly opened the door. The stran^r in f; ~ a mourn-
- - - —- — # eak it to them ?"
ould it were over," answered Wal- '* At any rate, we must not leave
W— HI WffJUl ^ _WlBk
tt
Margiana, now incapable of further res¬ traint, advanced from behind the arras, and stood trembling, and pale as a spectre, be¬ fore Wallop and the supposed stranger.-— They were at the further end of the long apartment, gloomily lighted by dying em¬ bers and a single lamp, which scarce en- led her to discern that the latter was
They started on beholding her. She moved not, nor attempted to utter a word. Alarmed at the stupefaction that seemed gaining on her senses, they approached her, and Ethelred kneeling down, said— " My dearest cousin, exert your fortitude— your good sense—your piety !" He was
»• Speak on/' said she, convulsively. " Any thing but suspense—My i ther
Ethelred arose, turned from her, and walked to the side of the room, where he leaned his head against the hangings. 4 It must be done," cried Wallop, speak¬ ing fast,—" You must know all.—Lord
Widdrington " Is^no more," said Margiana, with af¬ fected resolution.—Wallop lowered his voice—-** He went to Raby, concealed in the garb of a simple knight, and fell there, fighting for King Richard/'
Ethelred now raised his head to observ
e
Margiana. She did not faint, but her evvn ere fixed on vacancy, appearing tincon-
scions of objects before her. Ethelred drew near, and supported her, but she did not observe his action. Wallop asked her to return to the room they had quitted, .e
•J ** >! H i*
She suffered them to lead her to it, and the r placed her on a seat, where, covering he"* face with both hands, she heaved a sigh that seemed to cleave her heart. Ethelred, leaving her with Wallop, went out to find Genevieve, to whom, on her return, he broke the dismal truth. But she scarcely understood him before she sunk lifeless into his arms. # f Wallop, who thought this the most for¬ tunate event that could have happened for Margiana, now directed her attention to her sister; and • calling some female domestics into the room, Margiana helped them to convey Genevieve into her own chamber, where they spent the remainder of the wretched night; whilst Wailop and Ethelred waited in the room below ; nor •would they, even when the morning dawned, both quit the house together.
a|AP
MARGIANA
^^8!tf- a»am n n« ^
CHAP. VI.
J Sword, a Shitld, and a Parting. Ir was some time before Ethelred and Ha¬ rold Wallop, now left alone, could con¬ verse with any degree of composure.—The heart of the former was almost broken by the sight of Margiana's silent anguish, added**) his own sorrow ; and when \m friend entreated him to lie down, and en¬ deavour to obtain some rest, he said he felt no fatigue but that of mind ; and that it was impossible for him to think of repose. Harold respected his grief too sincerely.
and was possessed di' too much good sense, to make use of any of the common-place arguments of consolation. He sincerely lamented, with him, the death of the amiable, but erring, Lord Widdrington ;— and when he perceived Ethebed a little more tranquil, desired, if th task was not too painful for his own feelings, that he would relate the particulars of his journey to Widdrington Tower. a A very dismal one it was/* replied Ethelred.— " May Heaven, in its wrath, never punish me with such another! No¬ thing I have to relate can render my feel¬ ings more acute than they are ; and since 1 cannot, for an instant, turn my thoughts to any other subject, why should I not talk of this ? " Towards the approach of evening, on the fourth day after my departure from hence, I arrived at the small village you re¬ collect about ten miles on this side of Wid¬ drington Tower, I had hoped to have reached
reached the end of my journey earlier; bur the extreme badness of the roads which had been very much broken np 9 had considerably delayed us, during the former part of the day ; and our holies now were so much fatigued, that, with great regret, I found myself compelled to halt at this place, and have them fed. " Just as I was alighting at the door of a house that seemed the most likely to aflbrd us refreshment, I saw two men con¬ versing together, one of whom, I thought, was my father's confidential servant, Scruton. I approached him, to ascertain the fact; for it was nearly dark ; and, speaking as I advanced, the fellow started nt my voice. ' My young master!' he exclaimed, in a surprise, that 1 thought did no* •"•em to be a pleasurable one, ' you are no doubt going to Widdrington Tower ?* fi I called him after me into the house, where, enquiring after* the health of the family, I told him the purpose of my visit, c 5 and
.MARGIANA. and that I brought King Henry's pardon for my uncle. He asked me if I meant to stay where I was all night, for he had observed the jaded condition of our horses, and I fancied appeared confused, when I made answer I should proceed in an hour's time. ' But/ said I, f as you probably have a horse here fresher than any of mine, we will exchange; by which means 1 can go on alone without any delay; for I am ex¬ tremely impatient to see my uncle/ ' Oh/ said he, ' do not think of going alone-at this late hour; skirmishing parties are crossing the country in every direction; and, as many of them are in Richard's inte¬ rest, and you are so well known for a Lan¬ castrian, you would incur the greatest dan¬ ger of being ill-treated, and even slain/ " I told him his fears were idle, and his reasoning frivolous, since I had nothing to apprehend in a country where Ittwsknown, and where I believed myself not to be un¬ popular, at the same time insisting on his obeyingme; upon which, saying he mutt submit,
submit, he abruptly left me, I also went out, to give some orders to my own peo¬ ple ; and soon after, wondering Scruton did not appear with his horse, I sent one of them to saddle it, and bring it out.— Judge of my surprise, when the man re¬ turned and told me that Scruton had him¬ self mounted the horse the very minute he left me, and had rode off at three quarters' speed, for Widdrington Tower 1 " Could I have overtaken, I should in¬ stantly have followed him ; and notwith- standing the respect I owed my father, have chastised his insolence as it deserved ; but as I had no chance of being able to do that, I wis obliged, however impatiently, to vield to circumstances, and wait until two of our best horses were sufficiently re¬ cruited to allow of my proceeding with a single follower. " Two hours more, nevertheless, were unavoidably wasted, before I reached home, where I perceived lights burning in the watch-tower and loop-holes, and the draw- o G bridiic
bridge let down. My father met me at the great entrance, and cordially greeted me i but he seemed, contrary to the usual composure of his appearance, in much emotion. This he noticed himself, and attributed it to my unexpected arrival. I asked if Scruton had not returned before me, and communicated the joyful nature of my errand?—' Scruton/ replied my father, * came back a little while ago, as I am told, for I have not seen him, and pro- , claimed your approach, saying you would have rode hither alone, had he not-pre¬ vented you, judging it would be unsafe. • But come in, you must be weary. You have probably rested but little while on your journey/ «I followed my father through the great hall of the castle, into the smaller room which he usually inhabits, and the,re saw only his customary companion, your un¬ cle, indulging in his ancient privilege of intoKication. I asked after my mother .and Lord Widdrington ?—' They are both gone
gone to rest, my dear Ethelred/ answered my father, s and you shall retire also, the moment you have had some refreshment. To-morrow we shall have much to say to each other. But you talked of joyful in¬ telligence. Explain that point to-night/ " I acquainted my father that Lord Wid¬ drington was forgiven. He seemed asto¬ nished, and launched out, as I thought, too much in praise of the King's clemency, and too little in rejoicings for his brother's safety. I was very urgent to see my uncle immediately, and asked who would not wil¬ lingly have their rest disturbed to receive such welcome news? But my father was peremptory in his commands, that I should defer all communication till the next morning; and Scruton soon afterwards bringing in some supper, and your uncle, my dear Wallop, growing extremely lov¬ ing and troublesome, as usual, when he is in liquor, I presently retired, delighted at the thoughts of the happiness I should dif¬ fuse the next morning, and the near pros¬ pect
, pect of seeing my mother again, and your little favourite Arlette. " The fatigue I had undergone, however, and which I had not before been sensible of, made me sleep much longer than usual. It was broad day when I awoke. Ashamed of such ill-timed indulgence, I started up, and hastened in search of Lord Widdring- ton, when I was met-by one of my father's servants, who appeared to have been waiting for my leaving my chamber. He brought me mv father's commands to join him in the park. I went there, and he met me with a kind embrace, but a very mournful countenance. f My beloved son/ said he, ' I have strange news to tell you, and which you little expect to receive. I could not bring myself to distress you with them last night, when you stood so much in need of quiet and repose, but every measure has been taken to avert impending evil that you yourself could either have suggested or assisted in."* st Dreading
" Dreading to ask my father what he meant, I continued silent, andhecontinued visibly striving to suppress his agitation. * Your uncle, my dearest Ethelred, is no longer at Widdrington Tower.—Deaf to every argument I could use, baflling every means I could devise to detain him, he set out secretly from hence yesterday, with old Kendrew, only a few hours before you arrived, to join the rebels, now collecting their strength in the neighbourhood of Ha by ; but I trust the misfortune is not ir¬ remediable. I no sooner learned.from you that the King h&d been graciously pleased to pardon him for his past ofienccs, than I gave immediate orders to Scruton to fol¬ low him on the swiftest horse in my stables, and inform him of the mercy that was ex¬ tended to him, not doubting but that, on receiving the intelligence, he would in¬ stantly return rand the secret of his in¬ tended second offence will then be con¬ fined to ourselves. Scruton has now been gone several hours. There is no question he
he will overtake him ; and this night, or early to-morrow at the furthest, I hope we shall see him here in safety, and with a heart loyally disposed towards the most in¬ dulgent of sovereigns. ( Honest Scruton did his utmost to prevent what has happened. He told me, that on yoa* acquainting him with the bu¬ siness on which you came, he hastened home, in hopes'he might reach Widdring- ton Tower in time to prevent your uncle's departure, which he knew he meditated, when I sent him on business, to the place where you met him* Would to Heaven you had arrived a day sooner! However, we have every reason to hope all will yet end well/ ({ Grieved at this most unfortunate event, and much doubting the diligence "of Scru¬ ton, a fellow, whose character I never thought deserving of any esteem, I en* treated my father would suffer me also to set out immediately in pursuit of Lord Wid* fbington. * I can see my mother/ said I, r at
* at my return ; but perhaps there is not a moment to lose/ * No, Ethelred/ he replied, < I will not consent to your leaving me. Turbulent parties of factious men are over-running many parts of this neighbourhood; and should they attack Widdrington Tower, I have been too ill for many days to be now able to give the necessary directions for repulsing them. Besides, you cannot w of further use than Scfuton himself. He knows our anxiety for your utick's safety too well, to hazard either your displease or mine, by any remissness. " Finding my father so determined, I was forced to acquiesce, but I signified my submission with a very ill grace, and then proposed returning to the castle, to pay my duty to my mother. ' Alas V said he, * there is another uhplea*- sant circumstance I have to apprise you of respecting her: Since Lord Widdringtoit has been in Northumberland, his amiable character and pleasing manners have m
entirely .wen her friendship, that she has become as strongly attached to him as if he was her Own brother; and her sorrow was so extreme, on finding he was resolute to take up arms once more against the King, that at his departure she made a solemn vow to confine herself to her own apartment, to pray for his safety and his conversion to the loyal cause, until his return : and in case he should never return, her vow of seclusion extended to one entire year.—~ This vow she swore, at the foot of the altar, never to infringe, even for the sake of her dailing son ; though, at that time, she was far from suspecting you to-be so near/ i <( I was even more surprised at this ac¬ count than at what 1 had learned respecting my uncle. Such gloomy superstition so little belonged to the general tenor of my mother's conduct, always guided by her enlightened understanding, that I could scarcely credit my. father's words. ,;/ I do not wonder at your astonishment/ said he.—'/However, be composed. Your t ; ..... patience
patience will not be put either to a long or to a severe trial. Lord Widdrington's re¬ turn will release your mother from her vow, and restore us all to happiness. He will accompany you back to London ; and the King will never know that he proposed a second outrage against him. You have not seen your sister yet; we will go in and breakfast with her/ " He turned towards the castle as he said this, and I followed him, too much con*» loutided and hurt, by all I had heard, to support any conversation; though my fa¬ ther talked with recovered tranquillity of the situation of the country, the --illness of the Earl of Northumberland, and the ex¬ pected arrival of Lord Percy. " As we approached the buildings I was preparing to turn short into the back court, that gives ths nearest communica¬ tion to poor Arlette's staircase, but, in a perturbation I could neither account for nor overlook, my father suddenly laid hold • of
of my arnii and led me round to the great «gate^ ' |>o not cross that court/ said he ; * I have beetl repairing an old wall there, and it is full of stones and rubbish/ Happen* ing to look &t him? at the moment, I ob¬ served hi changed colour. But I know not why I mention to trivial a eircumstance, unless because it gave me a suspicion that he eoinfined my Mster more strictly than befor0,. " W« W#nt iri. I found At lette kell, and *# lively ad eirer. But I could think only of fBy t»t%e£e,< 6f hts strange infafuntioh, tndiaf fhe/distreBs.Mai^laria would suffer, if she §ver learned a circttmstanee I feared it would be very difficult to conceal. In HWi m? fdtfier talked of the interests of ^ie King, and of the reasonable hopes that Blight be entertained by those who stre¬ nuously maintained theft. Vain was Ar- Jette's gaiety, and her odd enquiries whe~ tH#r Hotspur was as mad, and you as gen¬ teel
teet as^ ever, | was restless, *and incapable of attention ; and my uneasiness was not to be expressed, when that day, and nearly the whole of the next, overpassed, without any tidkigs being reeeive4 either from Lord; Widdrington or from Scruton. "But on the second evening, as I was returning from visiting a distant part of my dear uncle's domain, I was met bv mv fa- ther on the outside of the castle walls. He called to a servant as soon as he saw iug.—~ r Alight/ said he, s Ethelred, and give your horse t« the groom; I must speak to yo.u in private. I did as he ordered me ; and we walked to a remote spot, where no per¬ son appeared within Rearing. He then drew for*h a Fing, and, asked me if I knew it? * Full well,* say I.—' My unrdje is. then returned ? It is his/ * 'It is/ replied my hthet.—f But be w not returned. Hf& km: m* h kwk.' * Sen^ H baet! Oh$ Healiri?ns! \m he thm piroued te wy to Bafey ?' - • i
MARGIANA.' * Re patient/ said my father—* I will tell you all. { You had no sooner rode out of sight this afternoon, than I was informed a man, habited like a peasant, asked to speak with me. On ordering him to be brought into the castle, a person entered, whose face was utterly unknown to me.— f You are Bertram Winburne/ said he.— •' I am sent on a secret message to you from Lord Wid- drington. He bade me give this jewel into your hands, as a pledge of my veracity, and deliver these words, which he would not trust to writing— f Tell my brother Bertram, and my beloved nephew, Ethel¬ red Winburne, that honour forbids mv ie- turning with the man they have sent after me, and who persists in refusing to leave me. In the same cause that I have lived, I will die. Should I survive the approaching contest, I %vill return to Widdrington Tower. If i fall, Scruton shall carry back myj sword and shieid to my nephew, as tokens of the love I bear him. But mv' i death
death will be known only to my own fa¬ mily, for I shall meet my foes under the plain semblance of a knight/ Such was the exact message of Lord Widdrington/ con¬ tinued the stranger; ' I have now executed my commission, and crave your leave to depart/ 1 Having no pretence for detaining him/ pursued my father, 1 1 granted him the per¬ mission he desired ; and now we have only to pray that the rebels may disperse, before Lord Percy brings them to an action. All that it was our duty to do, we have done ; but mv mistaken brother is led on by his fate/ " Finding I returned no answer— ' You do not hear me, Ethelred/ said he.—' What is it occupres your thoughts ?' ' That whilst you, ray father, are pray¬ ing for the safe return of the chief of our , house, it is my duty to speed, in arms, to the field of battle, and either, save hie life, and bring him back, or perish with him/ i * I had forgotten/ observed he, in a sarr,; > castic
castic tone, € that Lord Widdrington wa* the father of Margiana, as well as the chief of our house ; but you, it seems, remem¬ ber it, though you forget how unlikely it is that the arguments of a boy should dissuade him from his purpose. As to pe¬ rishing with him, such romantic folly might have excited admiration at the time of die crusades, but I will not sufter it here
" Mv father said a good deal more in ...is strain; but finding me not to be moved, and resolute to go to Raby, he so far yielded as to say that he would not op¬ pose my departure the ensuing morning; but for that night, which indeed was fait shutting in upon us, and an approaching storm lowered in the sky, ht charged me, on my duty towards him, to make no at¬ tempts to leave Widdrington Tower, « With this concession I was forced to rest as well satisfied as I could, and we re¬ turned into the castle, where we again d ymt uncle ; and my sister was suf¬ fered
fered to spend the evening with us. In me they had a* dull companion ; I was a prey to anxiety. Nevertheless, soon after supper, I felt so unaccountable a drowsi¬ ness, that to this moment I still suspect it proceeded from some unfair means taken to ensure my obedience, and prevent my setting out that night. If this was really the case, it is my duty to suppose my fa¬ ther's intentions were blameless; and per¬ haps my going might not have averted the misfortune we now lament; yet 1 shall never cea^e to regret that I did not pursue my uncle, the very first night I arrived at Widdrington Tower. A particular circum¬ stance renders me still more suspicious that some arts were practised. I ordered a ser¬ vant of my father's to have my horse hi readiness, and to come into mv chamber two hours before day ; but, until it was very late, no sound disturbed me ; neither did I awake early, as usual; and on my' chiding the man, he only said he had mis* understood my directions, vot. it. « << \t
ec At length I was ready to depart, and promised myself, by future diligence, to make up for the time that was lost, when, having taken leave of my father, and gone down into the outer court, I perceived Scruton slowly riding over the drawbridge, followed by a peasant, bearing, alas ! how r chill flowed the blood to my heart, a sword and a shield. " Oh, my dear Wallop ! what need have I to dwell upon the rest ? The rebels had made a desperate, though vain stand, against Lord Percy; and my uncle, whom Scruton represented as even eager to rush upon death, fell at the very first onset.— His wound was in his breast, from an ar¬ row, and he continued bleeding till he fell into the arms of Scruton, who never left him, and declared he took every possible measure to preserve his life. ** He charged him to bury him in the field, and by no means to remove him to Widdrington Tower, that it might not be l^nown he had fought in the disguise of a man
vrmn of inferior rank. He bade him bear to me the arms he had before engaged to send, and charged me with his tender love to his daughters/ c< 1 need ! not, to vou, describe the anguish that overwhelmed me. I went * -r- back into a ! remote apartment of the castle, whe're I threw myself on the ground, and saw no one for many hours; for my father respected my sorrow, ami would not suffer it to be intruded upon. Indeed he-was profoundly afflicted himself, and even shed tears when we met. The whole of that day we devoted to mourning ; and on the next he bade me return, to bring the fatal news to his nieces/who are now become his wards, by rfn order, expressed in a-writing, which my urick/left at Widdrington Tower! as his last will,-before "he set oUt-bn this fatal expedition.- - ' ; (C You are particularly desired 'b^ni^f father to escort them thither; for he told me- he'" trad* ^trdngf J reason^ th#treh -lie for* ;:- 1! O
continue at this time near the King. I ae* quiesccd; though what have I now to do with motives of ambition ! only stipulat¬ ing for leave to return in a few weeks, if the King has then no occasion for my ser~
" Poor old Kendrew fell, I need hardly say, fighting by the side of his Lord. You therefore will probably be the friend most welcome to the unhappy Margiana and
When Ethelred had concluded his dis* ma! recital, the kind-hearted Harold ex- pressed a grief very little inferior to his own; and they spent some time in lament¬ ing the iil-fated and ill-directed steadiness ©f Lord Widdrington to the cause of a mo¬ narch who had always been, in the time of his prosperity, so much less strenuous in
t >rMssiself/'said Wallop* "that Lord Wid
reasonable hope has been extinct, Henry of Lancaster would never have ascended England's throne.. But I will talk to you no more, Ethelred, until you have slept.— You look haggard, and exhausted with fa¬ tigue. How will you have spirits to meet your cousins in the morning, if you do not obtain some repose to-night V 9 Ethelred yielded to this argument, and was preparing to He down, when a young 1 page of Margtana's, named Maurice, en tering the apartment, offered the two friends some refreshment, by the orde* of his lady.—* After they had partaken of i£ they spread their cloaks upon the floor, declining any other bed; and Ethelred strove to rest during the few hours that intervened before day-break ; whilst Wallop abandoned him¬ self to the reflections excited in his mincE by the narrative he had just heard.. The most earnest endeavours appeared. u 3. to*
to him to; have been practised to prereift Ithelred from seeing* his uncle before the engagement took place, in which he felL^-* The motives of Sferuton's extraordinary diligence to reach Widdrington Tower,; aad speak to his master :>before Ethelrcd;-could possibly arrive ther«, he thought so equt^- vocal, as'elearly to admit Of two interpre¬ tations ; anxiety to prevent Lord Widdring<» ton's rashness himself, or anxiety lest it should be prevented by his? nephew. 'For, could he suppose, that in case of his cem* municating that noblemanVmeditated de* sign to the latter, h^ would not have heett impelled, by the known affection he bore his uncle, to have made.uge^of at least as mueh speed as Scruton himself ? And to what *md should Ethelred have been so peremptorily forbidden to quit the castle, when his father knew the satisfaction it would afford his mind to obtain a personal interview with Lord Widdrington, unless it was feared that he actually possessed suf¬ ficient influence over him to -induce him to
to return without rushing upon his fate ? Did it not appear that Bertram had pas¬ sively suffered his brother to commit a second offence, which it could not be sup¬ posed the King would" forgive, instead of taking any really active measures to pre¬ vent him ? And how was it proved even that Scruton had faithfully executed his im¬ portant commission ? Lord Widdrington, in the message brought by the man in a peasant's garb, made no mention of having been apprised of the King's intended par¬ don. On the contrary, he said, honour forbade his return. Was it possible to con-* ceive his notions of honour so mistaken, as to impel him to outrage, with reiterated rebellion, the sovereign who was extend¬ ing to him the hand of clemency and for¬ giveness ? • Wallop's dislike of Bertram Winburne gave bitterness and weight to these reflec¬ tions ; and when he recollected the rash blow and unfortunate quarrel, that fol- ii 4 lowed
lowed it, between the two brothers at Flint Castle, though so many months be¬ fore, and thought of the malicious and un¬ forgiving nature of the youngt-oi, he felt an internal conviction that the valuable life of Lord Widdrington had been sacri¬ ficed^ by neglect, to ambition or revenge ; and that, had Ethelred pursued him without delay, he might have been preserved to his daughters* and to the numerous friends who were now condemned to mourn his hapless destiny. Disturbed and grieved hy this train of painful ideas, and distressed* moreover, en their iJwn accounts, to find that Margiana and Genevieve were fated to the melan¬ choly and remote abode ©f Widdrington Tower, under the dominion of an uncle, whom he felt assured neither of them could love, Wallop vainly endeavoured to close his eyes during the remainder of the night, though, till his friend awoke, he carefully avoided disturbing him. The
morning they were admitted to see Margiana and her sister ; and it then became their pain¬ ful task to apprise them of the journey which the guardianship, and the positive injunctions of their uncle, rendered it ne¬ cessary for them to take. But they were agreeably surprised to find that neither of the sisters expressed the leasfdislike to such a change of residence. Genevieve was wholly passive, and seemed utterly incap¬ able of forming any reflections either on her present or her probable future situa¬ tion ; and 1 Margiana, who, with dry eyes and settled woe stamped on every feature; listened patiently to all they said, only made answer, that every place being now alike to her, she could not reasonably ob¬ ject to any.— « 1 «m glad," said she, ts since we must'be a trouble to some of our friends, and since we cannot have the pro¬ tection of a kinsman, that you, Wallop* are to go with us rather than a stranger/ 8
ot
5 aue
She then asked. Ethelred how soon his V father would expect them at Widdringr ton Tower ? and being told, as early as the length of the journey would admit of—" To-morrow," replied she, si we can be ready; for why should we stay here ? If you, Ethelred, will take up your abode in this house, and assume the direction of it when we are gone, there is nothing that need detain us longer, provided the short¬ ness of the notice is no inconvenience to your friend/* Wallop assured her it was none, r.nd that he could be at hers and her sister's con> mands, at half an hour's warning* They then fixed on an early hour the following morning for their departure, which Wallop said he would go and pre¬ pare for, and take leave of the King, while Ethelred staid in the house with his cousins. But he was no sooner gone than Margiana, ever mindful of the feelings of others, en- q treated
treated ihe I:\tter would go to Lady Rothes^, and inform her of the mournful event of his journey. lie immediately obeyed her; and notwithstanding the little esteem in which he held that lady, he gave her some credit for the unfeigned affliction she ma- nifcsted, on hearing the news he brought; and even pitied her when he considered that her feelings might be almost as acute as his own. Margiana, on his return, was glad to find, from his report, that her health had (oiibiderabfv improved during the two last days, so that she was now entirely out of danger, and that her favourite friend Clara Castles was with her. Ladv Rothes had been dear to the beloved parent whose me¬ mory now was treasured in her heart; her infant she believed lobe hi:; child: could she therefore be less anxious for their wel¬ fare than she was 3 At the appointed time on ihe ensuing; ti G dav.
day, Wallop was ready at the door, with the necessary attendants. One female ser¬ vant, and young Maurice, the page, were all the domestics the two. sisters thought proper to take with them from London. As Ethelred^ wkh a voice rendered in¬ distinct by his emotion, took leave of Mar- giana, he asked her if* when. Wailop re¬ turned, she would oblige him. with a letter? " You may depend upon it," she an¬ swered.-— {< Farewell! and thank you for all your past kindness—all your unavail¬ ing cares l" He embraced her; and Genevieve, half drowned in tears, sunk sobbing on bis shoulder. st Farewell/* said he, " dear Genevieve t Take care of yourself; take care of your " Heaven
11 Heaven bless you, my Lord !" replied Genevieve.— <f May our next meeting be happier!" ** My Lord !/* exclaimed Margiana, start¬ ing, and becoming paler than before.-— - Oh ves, I had forgotten-—you are Lord Delancey now—the heir of Widdrington ! Ah, Genevieve, how could you say so ?" Ethelred hurried them on. They were lifted upon their horses, and silently fol¬ lowed Wallop ; while Ethelrcd retired into the house, and, 'for awhile, gave way to the annuish that loaded his heart.
JiiumTpectcd Clause in a Will, The dreary month of February offered no objects to the dejected travellers but such as were in unison with their own feelings. Wallop, nearly as much oppressed as his lovely companions, rarely attempted to disturb their mournful silence ; and they all experienced the truth of that common¬ place observation, that change of scene affords no relief to the wounded mind. Genevieve's melancholy was become, in a certain degree, habitual; and she vielded;
tChil ivith a J most helpless weakness; while ^iargtana> with pious and rational fqrti« tude, strove to stem the tide of her own sorrow, and prepared herself to meet the future, whatever it might be; so that Wal¬ lop had never so clearly discerned the dif¬ ference between their characters as every hour made evident to him now. When they had been four days on. the road, and. mrore than half their journey was overpast, Margiana attempted something like conversation. She talked of thq scenery through which they passed, and said she looked forward to more comfo^t^ from the quietness of retirement, than ifc was possible > for. any p^her.ctceuinstance* situated as.she was> to,bestow. ? - <f Good sense and good temper will make people fm& comfort any -where/* n> turned Wallop.—" I should not therefore wonder if I heard of your beiug, cqui^ted in a.dungeon.. *Sut y.ot| t . mw& *y>h'Pfiti$Pk vYiddnng-
r Widdrington To%ver to be such an Elysian solitude as Edgehill. Instead of the Sylvan deities, the fauns and the driads, the gigantic genius of the forest, and the spirit of the water?, preside there." *' Then we must endeavour to make friends of them/' said Margiana.—" But the kindest service you can do us will be to inform us how we can make a friend of my uncle/* « I %vish I could tell you that; but I never knew how to please him myself, and 1 never knew when he was pleased. I will not raise your expectations, to meet inevi¬ table disappointment, by leading: you to hope for any satisfaction from'"that quar¬ ter; Arlette you will love, as certainly as she will love you, if indeed yon are ever permitted to meet at times when she is not restrained by her father's presence. But, for vour sakes, I most regret the unae« countable vow and seclusion of Lady Ra¬ chel, owe of the first of women, whom you would have known as well in' three days>
and have been as cordially attached to, as if she was your own mother/' « Such a parent," observed Margiana, « must have made amends to Arlette, even for the strange imprisonment she endures/' « And even for her father, my dear lady, if any circumstance could make her amends for having such a father/' But though Wallop was at no pains to conceal his extraordinary aversion to Ber¬ tram Winburne, whom, if possible, he now more than ever disliked, since his becom¬ ing Earl of Widdrington, he never per T mined himself the most distant allusion, in the hearing of Margiana, to that wilful ne¬ gligence he suspected him to have been guilty of, concerning his late brother. He well knew her feelings of sorrow and re¬ gret needed no stimulus to render them more acute; and since she and Genevieve were probably destined to live some time with their uncle, he would not make-their abode
abode with him more painful than it was likely, at the best, to prove. But his friendly discretion was of no avail. On the day previous to their quit¬ ting London, when Wallop had left Ethelred with his cousins, Margiana had desired the latter to relate all the particulars he knew r , relating to her father's death ; and though Ethelred had been somewhat more reserved in-his narrative to her than to Wallop, yet he had said enough to convince the pene¬ trating Margiana that, even in his opinion, his pwn father had not acted as he ought. Like Wallop, however, she suppressed her thoughts; and since Genevieve did not se@*n to view the affair in the same light she did, she forbore to awaken ideas in her mind that could not but inflict a fruitless anguish, On the contrary, she took every measure to raise the spirits of the drooping girl, by talking to her of the pleasure they should enjoy, in, the society of the frolick- some
Af ARC I an a; 163 some Arlette, arid of the agreeable rambles they might indulge in together, when the return of spring enabled them to explore the wild haunts and romantic recesses they had been taught to. expect in the neigh* bourhoodof Widdrington,Tower, Margiana was not surprised that her sister seemed little interested by all she could say. Her dejection might now be at tri* bated .to a twofold cause; and Margiana* from her own inexperience, could not pre¬ tend to guess what her feelings might be, independent of the loss of her father, at being hurried from the city Lord Lothian inhabited, to the depth of a solitude; where she was not likely ever to see hint agaitit* as long as she resided there. It was at the close of a dark and tern* pestuous evening, when the traveller®, en¬ tered a hollow way,-tftat Wallop informed them led immediately to the domain be*»
longing to the house of Widdrington. A high rocky bank rose on either side of the narrow road, that wound, sometimes iu steep, and sometimes in gentle acclivities, to the summit of a hill, fr^m- whence, he told them, had there been sufficient light, they might have discerned the awful tur¬ rets of the black tower, a lefty building surmounting the rest of the castle, and the fiat margin of the sea, with precipitous cliffs, rising far beyond to the North. Vainly the sisters looked forward. The va 'ley beneath was overspread with so im- tr- letrable a gloom, that what in fact was shadow, they mistook for forest ground •—• The real woods laid further to the left, too distant for them to hear the storm groan¬ ing; through their ancient branches; but as they advanced, the road drawing nearer to the sea shore on the right, they heard the loud roar of waters at every interval of the rising wind that whistled round their heads, through
through the leafless boughs of a few trees that were thinly scattered by the side of their path. *< The spirit of the ocean, that you told us of the other day," said Margiana, « seems to be seriously at work just now." « He is welcoming you and Lady Gene¬ vieve to Widdrington Tower," replied Wallop; " and he generally greets in a very loud voice on this, part of the coast." <•• I wish," said Genevieve, whose con¬ stitutional timidity was now strongly ope¬ rating, " I wish we could be sure that my uncle*would greet us with a kind wel¬ come." " Oh, do not fear that/' cried Wallop.— "He will be kind enough to you at first, whatever he is after awhile. Arid should he, owing to some miraculous turn of mind, for which there would be no ac¬ counting, chance to dislike either <of you, vou might then be the most certain of re- ^%/ Sft* ft T *A#jt™
ceivtuff civil treatment. If there is anv rule by which your uncle's sentiments inay be guessed at, which, however, I do,not believe there is, it would be that of always judging contrary to appearances, and sup¬ posing those he notices "the least his greatest favourites." < "■" What a. temper!" exclaimed both sisters at once.-— {< iHow unlike our dear father's!" " - ". W%icli was warm and open as ihe noon¬ day sunshine," added Margiana. - ■> \ • - w . ' ' - They proceeded about half a mile farther in silence, and. all apparently, buried in thought. At last, as they drew very, neat? the oMkkbrous. pile that towered above The darfc Old Toresi behind'-it, Wallop, who was riding a little way before his companions, swldemly stopped his horse, and turning rounds abruptly asked 'Margiana whetto she had «ver %&en iktmn cle J -? t J ' f '■ - j * . * , - * ■ • ' *" * - - ■ ' *■ ■ * ... . ,> <f Never/'
____ * e Never,*' replied she, a good deal sur¬ prised at his question, because she thought he knew she never had. " That is odd/* observed he, " consider¬ ing you are such near relations. But after you have seen him to-night, let me know whether his features remind you of any one you ever met with before/* Supposing he made some allusion to Ethelred, she returned no answer; and a few minutes more brought them to the drawbridge, which they found let down ,* for Wallop had sent one of the attendants ' on before, to apprise Bertram of their ap¬ proach. After they had crossed it, Margiana, not¬ withstanding all the resolution she had .summoned, felt appalled ; and .poor*Gene¬ vieve trembled at every joint, as she heard the trampling sound of their horses' feet upon the paved court, returned in 'hollowtchoes from-thexlark h%*h walls/ - They
by the only domestic that appeared, beheld the great entrance of the castle, which seemed as if yawning to entomb them.— Wallop, alighting from his own horse, of¬ fered to assist them from theirs. They were rejoiced at the sound of his voice ; and even Margiana involuntarily ex¬ claimed—" Oh, Harold ! do not leave us." . " Fear nothing/ 1 replied he.— " You may be assured of a kind reception." They followed him into a huge hall, cold and damp as a cavern, that appeared to their frightened imaginations to beat least fifty feet high. It was hung round with spears and bugle horns, and other martial accoutrements, which, as the wind rushed through the wide portal and dis¬ turbed them, sent forth a sullen mournful clangour* Genevieve caught hold of Wallop's arm. Both he and Margiana thought she was sinking*
sinking. door from an inner apartment opening, a mean-looking man, dressed in black, came forward, and addressing Margiana— 4 ' You are welcome, niece/' said he.—"You have done mv dwelling honour, by your prompt removal to it/' Margiana and Genevieve both started ar- the sound of his voice, and at thesight of' his figure, and both turned extremely pale. He observed theirny and looked displeased. However, he saluted Genevieve in her turn ; and Wallop said—" Your injunc¬ tions, my Lord, were obeyed as early as- possible. We left London* on the secondi day after Lord Delanccy's- return." " That is well," answered he.— u YotV are all welcome—extremely welcome ! and I am obliged to you, Wallop, for your care of my nieces. But come in ; your uncle is icre, and will be glad to see vou." So savins, he conducted them into the
old man sat drinking, alone. He did not arise on their entrance; but, on perceiv¬ ing Harold, he made a joyful inarticulate exclamation, and held out to him a Bason f filled with liquor.
" Here/* said he, " drink, my lad !— rink, if you are wise, and stay at home for
i*
Wallop shook his uncle by the hand, and ted him how he did ; while Bertram, with feward civility, led his nieces to seats at e upper end of the room, and continued; some time, an unmeaning conversation tern, relating only to the particulars ourney, but which gave them an lily of recovering, in some degree, sence of mind. At length— " You must stand in need of refreshment," said he ; "1 will go and order you some^ — fterwards, you will probably wish for repose,
repose. You are welcome to every thing, I can command." He then left the room, and Wallop, quit* tin<r his uncle, came to them.—" Well," said he, in a low voice, as he drew near,, " do you think now that you ever saw/ Ber¬ tram Winburne before :" *'* Oh yes/ replied Margiana; " who could have believed it! And,the King railed him a villain !—Good God 1" . * ( ^ " "i hen he really is the man whom you saw w\\\\ the King, and whom you called th»* iiiViteriotis stranger V t: The very same. Gracious Heavens I whar strange secret could have brought, him there so privately,, that none of his own fami!\ v.ere apprised of his journey ?'* '• I could a.*j readily tell you what will happen an hundred years hence.. Bertrain's proceedings are .all strange .secrets. He shuns the light of day. lie ought to have been an owl, instead of a man/* **■ But why, Wallop, if you believed my aucle to be the person we saw, did you i y conceal
conceal your suspicions from us ? You might have spared us the disagreeable sur¬ prise we felt at the unexpected sight of him, md which, 1 fear, he observed, and was of¬ fended at/* tf Because I could not be sure of the fact, however accurate your description was ; though when you spoke of hiscring- ing attitude as that of one more accustomed to obey than command, I felt something verv like conviction; for your uncles manners are the most rem®te from those we expect to see in the descendant of a noble family, or even an independant ** Do -you think he was offended at us?" said Genevieve. " It is not unlikely, he has been so civil to yon ever since/' " Lord have mercy upon us !" continued she, almost in tears, " what will become of us ? What must we do to please him ?** w You must trust to chance, my fair friend. But your sister has in her power a cep*
a certain means of obtaining his favour.— She need only marry his son, and he will worship her." ." I doubt if his favour be. worth obtain- in-/' said Margiana.—" However, it is de- si rable we snould conciliate him as much as lies in our power; though, .for my owr part, I feel the attempt- will be painfully difficult. He has a way c?f leering through his half-closed cy^s, that renders him in¬ supportable ; and Iknvowno task .in ore irk¬ some than that, of assuming an appearance of resnect or .esteem, when you feel net- tner. ■- • * > •,■'■■ " Your uncle might remove all yoiir dif¬ ficulties of that naHire, if; he-chose to give vou a few lessons out Oi his books. What you think irksome, is the easiest thing in the world to him. Let me* however,; Im¬ part a littk advice to you on .on^ point*— Never pretend a particular regard for him. Even if it was possible you could feel it, I should recommend you so make no display of your sentiments. He would immedi- i 3 at civ
ately suspect you both of hypocrisy, and you could never convince him you were sincere, though you lived with him nftv years, and your behaviour was uniform all ■isf »i •the time." * f Was there ever such a disnosition ! — Can he possibly ha\e been my fatlierV. brother ? or, can he even be the parent ol i&thelred-r of that engaging youth, whos-o •lovely openness 'of brow, and ingenuous* •siess of manners, obtain him universal friendship I" iS Ah, Lady Margiana ! do not praise him. 1 had rather hear any thing from y,ou> than commendation of Ethelred, it looks so like the quiet affection of a * i 9 Thev were interrupted here by a loud snore from the elder Wallop, who had fallen asleep the moment his nephew left him. Harold seemed ashamed, but was presently relieved by the re-entrance of Bertram, who was followed by a tali robust man.
man, of terrific appearance, bringing in a scanty supper ; which he no sooner placed on a table beneath the lamp, than Margiana recollected him to be the servant she had seen at the door. Lord Widdrington called him vScruton ; and from under his coal- black shaggy brows, his eyes glared on the two sisters with a ferocious expression, re¬ sembling the deadly glance of a lynx, just before he sptings upon his prey. Very little desire had they to eat ; but a significant gesture from their frien' 1 ^ave ^ them to understand that their uncle Would be better satisfied if they did. They drew, therefore, to the table, with Wallop, who affected to eat heartily, as if pleased with all that was set before him, and talked with the utmost gaiety and cheerfulness to Lord Widdrington; whilst the latter, who had supped before, sat by, but rather as a lis¬ tener than as one engaged in conversation himself; for Mannana observed that he cautiously weighed every word before he i 4 uttered
uttered it, even on subjects of the least im¬ portance; and whenever Harold asked him the most trivial question, he paused before he returned an answer, as if suspicious the other had a design of drawing him in, to sav more than he chose. They sat a very short time after supper, Scruton, who had carried it out, soon re¬ turned, and awaking Arthur Wallop, Ha¬ rold's uncle, led him from his seat, which Margiana and Genevieve considering as a signal for themselves to retire, asked their uncle's permission to withdraw. " Whenever you please," said he; " con¬ sider yourselves mistresses here. Lady Widdrington chuses at present to confine herself to her own apartment, though not from any desire to avoid either of you; and my little girl is too yot.ng to take any concern in family affairs. But a very res¬ pectable woman, a faithful old servant, shall conduct you to your chambers." Then
Then calling aloud for "'joycc" to bring a lio-ht. his summons was immediately obeyed by a large-boned, harsh-featured woman, who appeared advancing across the hall, to shew them the way. They wished their uncle and Harold a good night; and followed as she led, to the bottom of an immense staircase, that might have been mistaken for black marble, so dark had the old onk become from age; it waned to have been built for the sons of Anak, for every massive ball ust rade appeared a por¬ tion of the undivided parent trunk. Having reached the top of these stain, thev traversed a wide gallery, that con- ducted them into a suite of apartment?, which the sisters were more inclined to call wildernesses—the lair of wild animals, than chambers destined to the repose of the bus¬ man species. ' ~"h *. ' * "These black yawning chimneys," whis¬ pered Genevieve, fr look as if the horrid 4k w 4 4% w*>
rites of the Druids had been celebrated within them. I almost expect to see the remains of the wretched victims strewed on the hearths." " And yet," replied Margiana, te on such a cold night as this, they would look very comfortably with a cheerful blazing fire m each of them ;" for the rooms were so vast, that most of them had afire-place at either it $& end. After crossing these apartments, they came to a second gallery leading to tne chambers at the back of the castle, Joyce their conductress stalking on before them in a profound silence, that her counte¬ nance announced rather to proceed from sullennessthan respect. At length, turning down a narrow passage, and showing them through three rooms of moderate dimen¬ sions, she opened a small door at the fur¬ ther end of the third; and advancing be- vond it, into what might more properly be called a closet than a chamber, and v^hich j ust
just held a bed no wider than a coffin, a small wooden seat and a table, she told Gc~ nevieve that she was to lodge there* "Here!" said Genevieve, quite fright¬ ened, though it was with difficulty she un~ derstood the woman's language, a mixture of Scotch and slaughtered English ; (( here, did you say ? But here is not room for us both, and we do not chuse to be sepa¬ rated/' " You mav sav that to my Lord to-mor- row," answered Joyce, sullenly ; " but I must obey him to*night. He gave very particular orders where you were each to sleep, and I dare not but observe his com¬ mands/' She then, totally disregarding their en¬ treaties, lighted a lamp that stood on the table, and telling Margiana she was ready to proceed with her to. the room that she was to occupy, she strode towards the door, Genevieve caught hold of her sister, and i (> begged.
begged, in a piteous tone, that she would not leave her. Margiana, who felt for her fears, without partaking them, drew her arm through her own, and said—" Let us go together then," and they both followed Joyce into the adjoining room. The wo¬ man observed their action, but said nothing. They all three proceeded to the next door, that opened into the middle chamber ot the three last they had passed through ; but it was so narrow as only to admit of one personal once. Joyce went first, and sud¬ denly turning round, 3eized her opportur- nily with such promptness, when Margiana followed, that she closed the door upon poor Genevieve, locked it, and took out the key before Margiana, who had not sus¬ pected her intention, was aware of what sue had done. On perceiving it, she pre¬ pared to remonstrate; but the woman, holding up the lamp between their faces, displayed a countenance so hideously dis¬ figured bv a grin, that distended a wide mouth, half filled with long discoloured fangs,
fangs, and lighted up with eyfes so spark- Jin^ with exulting malice, that she shrunk back from her, almost m terror.
Joyce, satisfied with having gained her point, moved on till they again reached the second gallery, when, taking a contrary di¬ rection from what she had pursued before, she struck down a winding passage, which brought them to an iron door that stood auir. Pushing it open, she proceeded to another, of the same substance, nearly op¬ posite ; and discovering, through that, a roomv, but dark apartment, for there was no fire in it, she informed Margiana that washer chamber. She repeated the cere¬ mony of lighting a lamp, that stood on a cumbrous old oak table; during which in¬ terval, Margiana observed the same coffin- shap^ 1 bed that she had noticed in her sistei .room, and expected, like Genevieve, to be locked into this sort of sepulchre for the living. To her pleasurable disap¬ pointment, however, Jo}ce took her un¬ couth
couth leave, and quitted her without fas¬ tening the door, though to Margiana's de¬ sire, that she might have her own woman sent to her, she no otherwise replied than by sullenly observing, her Lord did not chuse to have any servants employed about the castle, save his own. As soon as she was gone, Margiana took a survey of her room. Owing to the dark¬ ness that obscured the further end of it, andthesombrous hue of the hangings, its leno-th seemed immeasurable, and the whole dreary space was occupied by no more fur¬ niture than what just filled the little closet where her sister had been left, namely, a seat, a table, and the bed, which had a canopy of black velvet, with curtains of the same. What a change to one who had been all her life accustomed to the cheer fu! and gay region of a court! Margiana could almost have fancied herself a disem¬ bodied soirit, in the fabled dominions of i. into* She
She resolved, however, not to encourage anv gloomv ideas; and more solicitous for Genevieve's comfort than fearful of any danger on her own account, she took up her lamp, after watching till it was probable Jovce might be retired for the night, and set forward, in hopes of being able to trace her way back to the door that had been locked, but through which she thought she might exchange a few words with her sister, and. thereby dissipate the terrors she made no question of her being in. With this view, closing after her the iron door, which Jovce had not thought proper to fasten, she looked forward for the other, that she recollected to have been opposite. ftut what were her surprise and fear, when instead of it she beheld, facing her, a figure in complete armour, with his vizor down, and a spear resting against the wall, by his side ! She concluded it to be one of her uncle's people, stationed there to observe if she quitted her chamber; and not dar-
ing to advance, turned round to retreat, when she discovered another figure, ac¬ coutred like the former, standing close behind her. She gave an involuntary start, that shook the old floor, and occasioned such a dismal clash of arms, as made her, for a moment, imagine herself surrounded bv a band of warriors, clad in mail. " Yet what illusion is this!" said she, as with firm resolution she held up the light, when the cause of her alarm became immediately . apparent. The room she stood in was an armourv, the sides of which were entirely co\ered with cuirasses, spears, shields, and helmets ; and a natural assemblage of these had produced the mistake she had fallen into. " So much for the powers of imagina¬ tion V* thought she.-— ,( How easily might I have gone back to my coffin-bed, fright¬ ened out of my senses, and persuaded that inv chamber was beset bv armed men I" Ashamed.
Ashamed of her cowardice, and deter¬ mined to be more collected for the future, she now proceededj and soon came to the winding passage. But making there a wrong turning, she was led considerably, though unconsciously, out of her way, and opening a door that she fancied coinmunt- cyted with the first of the three rooms ad- ioinins: her sister's closet, she saw, no very agreeable sight, Arthur Wallop, sitting over a large fire, undressing himself She quLkly drew back, but not before he had seen her. Uttering a strange note, either of pleasure or surprise, he arose in pursuit of the flying object, who, hearing his heavy feet behind her, speeded away, almost with the swiftness of a bird, nor stopped to take breath till she heard him, missing a step, come down with a noise as if a; waggon had been overthrown. Yet still afraid of his recovering his legs, and renewing the chace,shc did not think herself secure till she had traversed the two iron doors of the armoury v and fastened herself into her own
a. Nor dared she make a second at* tempt to speak with Genevieve that night, lest she might still find him lying across the passage; besides which, there was another cause that compelled her to give up all thoughts of it ; ihe oil in her lamp was nearly burned out, and she recoiled from the idea of wandering along the coid intri¬ cate windings of this vast pile, without a light. Commending herself, therefore, to the protection of Providence, with a sad¬ dened, yet not a discontented heart, she went to bed, and was soon lulled to sleep by the blasts of wind that rose with fre¬ quent showers of snow, and whistled round the'loft$ towers over her head.
The next morning, as soon as it was light, though still somewhat afraid of en¬ countering her pursuer of the preceding evening, she ventured from her retirement, avid, with better success, proceeded in search of her sister's little chamber. After
After making only one mistake, and seeing nothing of Arthur Wallop, she reached the three rooms contiguous to it ; but in the last of them, the door of which Jovce had locked, she found this woman, * whom she began to suspect was a spy, ris¬ ing from her own bed, Margiana, civilly noticing her, ?^ ed on, and discovered Genevieve still asleep, But before she could exchange a word with her, or even awaken her, Joyce, only half dressed, with part of her cloaths thrown over her arm, followed her, ami leisurely completed her equipment, evidently to preclude any conversation that she night uot herself be within hearing of. Surprised by this insolence out of her usual affability, Margiana asked her if she was authorised by her Lord thus to intrude upon Lady Genevieve and herself? To which the wou *r>. giving her an angry look, replied--" M> Lord chuses you should
should always be waited upon eitl er by my husband or mvself/5 w i( Pray who is your husband ?'* enquired Margiana.. '* Walter Scruton/' answered she.—-" We have lived here man and wife in tins castle nineteen years last Christmas-tide, and we are not to be taught our duty now. But it is time you should go down to break¬ fast. My Lord is already in the great hall, and waits of no one." Margiana, finding it would be fruitless to contend with this ill-tempered and vulgar woman, patiently sat down to wait till her sister was ready; whilst poor Genevieve complained bitterly of:having passed a wretched night, and of having been seve¬ ral times.frightened by the bowlings of the storm. Margiana might have told her of her own more serious alarm in vhe ar¬ moury; jbut.she dared not mention it in Jpyee's presence, fearful of being locked in for the future, if it was known she had presumed
presumed to ramble; a presumption which she now knew, however successful, must have been unavailing, since hec sister's apartment could not be attained without crossing through that where her vigilant guardianess slept. " Unaccountable precautions/' thought she, " to keep us asunder ! What can they portend ? What purpose are they designed to answer?" Without suffering her temper, however, to be ruffled, or shewing any resentment against the disagreeable woman who perse¬ cuted them, she talked with Genevieve on such subjects as they could introduce be¬ fore her; and they then went down, but still conducted by Joyce, who left them not until they came into their uncle's presence. He was at breakfast with the two, Wal¬ lops ; and Margiana now feared that the. recollection of the elder might too faith¬ fully
the adventure of the night before. But he presently relieved her alarm, for he took no scat" of notice either of her or her sister, further than by a gruff note of salu¬ tation, intended for a good-morrow. Bertram, on the contrary, was all servile civility; and though he had tyrannised overihem to the utmost of his power, dur¬ ing their short residence under a roof so lately their lather's, a stranger might now have mistaken him for the supplest of their creatures. The sisters mechanically and sympathe- icallv placed themselves on either side of
their friend- Harold, whose rough honest cowntenSmce rejoiced themes a welcome contrast-to the smoother features, but wily and insincere smiles, of their uncle, who nbw continued the conversation he had •n- engaged in before their entrance ; d-in the-comse-off it they learned, to their
their sorrow, that Harold was, that very day, to set out on his return to London. " I am grieved," said Lord Widdrington, " that you must leave us so soon, but I know your duty calls you away ; and from the appearance of the sky, I feur we are going to have a heavy fall of snow, which might prevent your journey, if you de¬ layed it any longer. Before you go, how¬ ever, we will, i.n vour's and your-uncle's presence, examine a writing, which my late dear brother left here on his departure for Raby, containing, as he informed me, di- rections relating to his property. T jSTo doubt he wished to make a very ample pro¬ vision, and such an one as they merit, for my ami; ble nieces. To me, Heaven knows, considerably more descends, with ihe fa~< mily honours, than I either desired or-de* served/' • " Very tree," sftid Harold Wallop, sign nifieantlv ; while bis uncle, who was de- vouring his breakfast m a-slovenly manner,
and with a tremendous noise, hoarsely grumbled out—" Noble possessions, in¬ deed ! A princely inheritance ! You may now keep such a table^QS the Lord of Nor¬ thumberland himself Cannot equal/' The whole of this disgusting old man's conversation, when he* spoke at all, which was but seldom, was of this nature; and Margiana wondered for what reasons her uncle, who did not appear to want'abili¬ ties, should like to have so much of his society. When the breakfast was over, Lord Wid¬ drington desired Harold would bring to them the writing in question, and directed' him to-look for it in the oaken press in the brown tapestry chamber, " which," said he, " my dearest brother occupied during his last residence here.—Be of good com¬ fort/' he continued, turning to his nieces, whom he observed to be very deeply af¬ fected. "-Youimay both, I conceive, rest , , ■ assured
assured your beloved father would be very particular in making careful mention of his children/* i( We think not of that, my Lord/* sa«l Margiana.— <( No further consideration than the loss of such a parent is needful to excite our everlasting: regret/' " What signifies such talk ?" cried Arthur Wallop.—" Get you both good husbands, and think no more of the past If I was a yoking man, 1 would soon put lather and mother out of your heads ; and if Harold was not a fool, he might have talked one of you over before this time. Young wo¬ men may be persuaded to any thing, it k only when they are old that thev are ob« stinalc/' Margiana smiled, without returning anv answer, while Genevieve whispered her— ** He knows but little of you, sister/' when Harold re-entered with the paper he had keen sent for. ~-ol.ii, m '"Open
i( Open and read it/' said Lord Wid- drington. e Harold obeyed. It contained a very few words, but was of an import that asto¬ nished both the sisters. After a very slight mention of Bertram Winburne, as the heir to the title of Earl of Widdrington, and the domains attached to it, a clause ensued, enjoining Margiana to bestow her hand on Ethelred ; in conside¬ ration whereof, two-thirds of the personal property that her father died possessed of, and which was very large, became her's, and the remainder Genevieve's, But in case of her refusal, then to cither sister was left a pittance barely sufficient to gain each of them admission for life into a clois¬ ter ; and the space of half a year, over and above the year of mourning for her father's death, was allowed to Margiana, for deter¬ mining her choice, Nothing:
Nothing but her amazement could equal ihe distress she felt at this harsh decree, so little to have been expected either from the confidence Lord Widdrington had al¬ ways placed in her judgment, or the very tender affection he had borne her. Harold himself, as he read it, could scarcely credit his own senses. " Is it possible 1" exclaimed Margiana. Harold reached to her the paper. . She saw her father's hand-writing, and the itn - presMon of his seal. Genevieve sat mut- with wonder, and looked at her sister as if she pitied her for being reduced to an ab tentative that she knew would be particu¬ larly irksome. "I am not much surprised," said Ber¬ tram.—" I expected something of this na¬ ture, though not quite so peremptorily ex¬ pressed, from the language my brother frequently held to me here. His heart, he x 2 was
<was pleased to say, had been set upon the union, ever since he became perso^a'dy acquainted with his nephew. And I hope, my dear niece, at the end of the appointed time, if not before, vou wdll also be recon- ciled to the thoughts of it, and be more just to yourself, and more charitable to your sister, than to condemn two line young women to the gloomy seclusion and discontent of a monastery, when nature and their rank in life have intended them to adorn an admiring court." As he said this, he bent his bodv into a cringing attitude, that he meant should convey an idea of kindness; but Margiana was unable to make any reply likely to give him satisfaction; for at that moment she felt more averse than ever to the pro¬ jected marriage. She had already seen too much of Bertram, to wish to become more nearly allied to him; and had not her sister been so deeply concerned in her de¬ cision, she would scarce have made any scruple,
scruple, even thus early, fo have declared her preference of a monastic life. But much time was before her, and she did not. bv anv siinis, betray the discomposure of her mind. Wishing, however, to be pri¬ vate with Genevieve, and in hopes they mbdit be suffered to walk together with- out the obtrusive presence of Joyce, she asked her uncle to allow of their taking advantage of an interval of sunshine that now prevailed. He seemed pleased at her considering his permission necessary; but to her sensible mortification, called for Joyce, to attend her young ladies out; and the woman instantly appeared, ready to accompany them, as if they had been two children. " There is no occasion, tny Lord/* said Margiana, if to trouble any of your do¬ mestics. We do not wish to go beyond the limits of the castle walls." He smiled, with a fawning gesture, hat k 3 replied,
replied, they would find it extremely dull walking within the courts, and that Joyce could conduct them to a pleasant garden, on the south side of the building; at the same time turning from them so abruptly, as to give neither of them an opportunity of saying more. They therefore followed their conductress out of the hall, after tell¬ ing W'allop they hoped to bid him farewell before he quitted the castle, and proceeded in silence till they reached the spot men¬ tioned by their uncle. Here, for the first time, raising her eyes from the ground, Margiana observed that her sister was weeping. " Oh, my dear Genevieve/* said she, af¬ fectionately embracing her, "do not aban¬ don yourself to melancholy ideas. We are under the protection of a being who will order all things for our advantage, if we trust in him. What we have just heard, 1 admit, is hfchly distressing, and the fur¬ thest
thest from what either of us could have looked for ; but many things may happen in the course of eighteen months to con¬ tribute towards our relief. Many chanties :nav occur we cannot now foresee," " Alas !" said Genevieve, " we know our father's will cannot admit of any change, and there is no other can possibly avail us —unless, indeed, your present sentiments alter—and hitherto they have been uni¬ formly steady." " Well," replied Mar^l; na, " it is time enough yet, and too soon, to distress our¬ selves upon the subject. Let us make the best of the present; conciliate our imcle, as well as we can, and be in fact every thing to each other. In the meantime, be you composed, under the conviction that I will sooner resign my life than condemn you, dearest sister, to un happiness, whilst any human means are hft me of averting it from you." She then turned cheerfully to speak to k 4 Joyce,
Joyce, and commended the beauty of the ornamented little spot they were in. It was a small enclosure, divided by a thicket of evergreens, and a high wall behind them, which they concealed, from the prin¬ cipal court. Every ray of noonday and evening sun that shone beamed upon it; audit was filled with flowering shrubs, that Margiana observed must, in the season, render it a delightful retreat, But Joyce, after informing her it was the favourite walk of Lady Rachel, who had planted it with her own hands, relapsed into sullen taciturnity, and refused to join in any con¬ versation, though she persevered in walk¬ ing close by their side. The sisters, nevertheless, were glad, to continue out of doors, till a thick shower of snow drove them in for.shelter; and then Margiana fulfilled her promise to Ethelred, of writing to him when their mutual friend returned into the South. -±r+ She
She made no mention of her father's will, but gave him, in cheerful terms, the particulars of their journey, and of their arrival at Widdrington Tower. She no¬ ticed, with approbation, what little of the surrounding country she had yet seen; gave no hint unfavourable to her uncle; and, in her whole letter, there was not one subject of regret but what related to Wal¬ lop's departure, and to the seclusion of * her aunt and Lady Arlette; though she concluded by saying it was her design ve¬ hemently to petition for an acquaintance with the latter. * W T hen she had written thus, she went down, accompanied by Genevieve, and followed by Joyce, in search of Harold, whom she found alone, in the great hall, waiting for her, having purposely suffered his uncle and Bertram to go out without him. On perceiving hep he hastily arose, and meeting her at the door, took a hand of each of the sbters, and, with a counte- * ^ nance
nance more severe than Margiana judged even his harsh features capable of, and a voice like thunder, bade Joyce withdraw, since he wished to speak to her ladies in private. The woman's colour rose, as if from stifled rage; but she nevertheless obeyed him without reply, to the surprise of Margiana and Genevieve, who told him they wished they could imitate his tones and gesture, that they might occasionally apply them to the same use of driving their troublesome governess away, Harold, %ho had carefully shut the door after her, bestowed on her the reverse of a blessing, in very strong accents; yet added it would be prudence in them not to pro¬ voke either her or Scruton, when they could possibly put up with the manners of either—" For," said he, " I grieve to say they are all-powerful with your uncle, who, having, during his whole life, withdrawn himself from the society of his equals, imagines what little honour or honesty sub¬ sists
sists in the world, is confined to persons of an inferior station. The consequence is, they serve him and dupe him at the same time. But you will see enough of this yourselves. I need not expatiate upon it. Neither shall I have opportunity to say much on any subject, for that hag, turned out herself, will soon send some of Ber¬ tram's spies to interrupt us. te To mention, therefore, what is most* material — your dear father's will.— Heaven grant/* pursued he, dropping on one knee, and rising again, " Heaven grant, sweet Margiana, your he*art may be softened to promote your own and your sister's happiness, before the allotted time expires ! for I wish your assent may be free, not compulsory. My noble-minded friend will not rejoice at, but lament a cir¬ cumstance distressing to you at present; though uniting yourself with him would be the readiest and the most certain means of releasing both you arid Genevieve from k 6 worse
than Egyptian bondage. You al- see enough of your uncle*s character, to know how to conduct yourselves towards l Lady Rachel, 1 find, you have no¬ nce of seeing. Waste no breath, there¬ fore, on that point; and do not press for an introduction to Aide :e too soon; for Ber- is more likely {jrant what you do &, than what v do. lie permitted jne to see her jusi .iw, while you were out, because I did r. solicit the favour ; and I found her wi with impatience to become acquainted with her cousins, lor she had learned your arrival from her old J-.arming ladies, bless ? t any instructions for « OK tftll us/' s;\: Genevieve, " how
?
*?
".It is impossibK: io say.—But when /ill move heaven and
iinejrefci ewiues,
v*i ____ -■.4a *
■' Pray s^eJLady i. : =-"- :acssometimes," said Margiana;
Margiana;—" and if ever a messenger should be sent to my uncle, tell us oi little Henffist." '• Yes; but I shall add a word or two concerning myself and my friend." " And welcome!" cried they both;—■ and they were going on to say more, when Arthur W T allop rolled into the room. Harold cast down his eves. The sisters looked at each other, impressed at once with ih'* same idea : and Margiana, pre- sen.ing her letter to Wallop, kindly wrung his oanu, and wished him a safe journey. " And a speedy return," added Gene¬ vieve ; " and do not forget us/* " Never!'* he cried, with energy.— " And now, uncle, farewell! I am. ready to begone/' The moment he disappeared, Joyce re* entered the hall, and asked Margiana where she and Lady Genevieve chose to sit ?
Thev had but little choice, for their own chambers were cold and comfortless. The air was-freezing ; and they had seen no fire in any room but the small one where they had supped the night before, and the great hall, of which they preferred the former.— Carrying, therefore, their work into it, they sat down, and strove to find amuse¬ ment in occupation, Joyce still conti¬ nuing inseparably attached to them, until their uncle and Arthur W T a?lop returned, and then she withdrew. During the remainder of the morning, thev were wearied by conversation the most uninteresting to them, relating to persons and places they had never heard of before; and when the hour of dining ar¬ rived, it was continued with little variation, excepting that Arthur Wallop descanted much, during the pauses of his coarse meal, on his favourite subjects of eating and drinking. Margiana
Margiana and Genevieve thought they had never beheld such a human swine; but were no longer at a loss, as in the morning they had been, to conjecture why his visits were encouraged to be so long and frequent at Widdrington Tower; for besides appearing to act upon occasion as an auxiliary spy, he seemed intimately ac¬ quainted with all that was passing in tfie neighbourhood, and retailed a variety of mean and vulgar anecdotes, to which Ber¬ tram listened with great apparent interest and pleasure. Glad to leave the society of such a guest, they again asked permission to walk as soon as the dinner was removed ; and having in the morning observed a build/.ng at a little distance, which they had beeu informed was the burying-place of their family, they de¬ sired their officious attendant would take them there, which she, not objecting to, they had proceeded above half way, though there
there was a slight covering of snow upon the ground, when the sky, suddenly lower¬ ing to the deepest gloom, threatened so heavy and so immediate a fall of more, that they readily agreed, at Joyce's request, to turn back, resolving, however, by the first opportunity, to pursue their object. They had no resource, on their return, but to resume their work in the little room, where they discovered their uncle writing, and his companion sitting, as they had found him, the preceding evening, with his flagon of strong beer before him. A few books, however, happened to be lying on the table, and one or two of them chancing to be such as thev could derive amusement from, somewhat assisted them over the interval till supper, very soon after which they re¬ tired, without having solicited Bertram, as they had once thought of doing, to allow of their sleeping in the same room; for they recollected the expression of their friendly
fnendly adviser, that they would find their uncle more disposed to grant them the fa¬ vours they did not ask, than those they did. And thus passed the first day of their residence at Widdrington Tower,
CHAP. Vlll, How to e$cape Matrmony-*»A Box of Diamonds, Tek next morning the whole face of the country was buried under so deep a snow, as to preclude all thoughts of amusement without doors. Arthur Wallop still con¬ tinued at the castle, and it now appeared as if his visit must necessarily be pro¬ longed ; though the sisters understood that the furthest distance to his house did not exceed two miles, by the horse road ; whilst a footway, that conducted thither, was full three quarters of a mile shorter.-—
He seemed, however, not inclined to en¬ counter the fury of the storm, by attempt¬ ing either of these roads; and satisfied with lounging away his morning hours in attend¬ ing Lord Widdrington about the confines of the castle, as he gave various orders to his people, he appeared in a state of pro¬ gressive happiness as the dinner-time ad¬ vanced, which was completed by the sight of that welcome meal. He was a man who, having from his very childhood been cursed with the dire disease of indolence, had never regularly applied himself to any pursuit. In his youth he had been a great hunter; but even his fa¬ vourite amusement he had never followed up with the spirited relish that belongs only to characters of more energy ; and his parents both dying before he was thirty, he had given himself up without controul to such habits of supineness, as rendered him a burthen to himself, and to every one near him. Though far from rich, he had a ihjr JL %#? %t *• W
was m
ty portion of landed property sur- nding his house, more than sufficient to e afforded profit, pleasure, and employ, in active man. But if Arthur Wallop read to eat, he cared neither when ;rain was sown, nor when it was : and the consequence was such as naturally be looked for; his farm ismnnaged and neglected, and he was ed by his servants.
it if* t all, when he was rescued from impend
doubtful w any bread to
j*
Of a disposition as animated and indus- rious as his was the reverse, she had been arried, early in life, to a kinsman of her He was a gay and thoughtless sy in his temper, and extravagant in his habits; and having fallen in a skir¬ mish against the Scots, he left his widow with
barely sufficient to supply a maintenance for herself 4- In this distress, Arthur Wallop, who was not ill-natured, rode over to see her, and administer some comfort, and a little pe¬ cuniary assistance. But the most cheering sound she heard was a promise that he would take care of her darling Harold, then only five years old, and be at the expence of having him decently educated. In ad¬ dition to this, he kindly invited her to re¬ move to his house, for a few weeks, or un¬ til her first sorrow became less acute; for her present residence was in a very lonely village above forty miles distant from his abode. To hare gone often to have seen her, therefore, would have been to him an insupportable fatigue. She accepted his offer with thankfulness, and leaving her little cottage under the care of a friendly neighbour, she set off, a
week after her husband's death, for he* brother's house, upon the pleasant and ro¬ mantic banks of the Coquet. After a residence there of two months, she began to think of returning home, and ta'Ling her lit?; boy back with her, until he should be of an age to profit. L-y his uncle's kind intentions* Accordingly she mentioned her design to Arthur Wailop, who looked extremely «rave upon the occasion. He returned her, however, no answer, nor spoke a word upon the subject till the following day, when suddenly breaking a long silence, he abruptly told her she was very foolish, in his opinion, to think of leaving him so soon. " It will not be very soon," replied she, * I have been here nearly nine weeks/' « And what hinders your staying here nine weeks more ?'* " 1 have
** I have no right to intrude upon you so long, brother. It was very kind in you to invite me to your house, during my first dis¬ tress ; but it is fit I should now depend upon my own endeavours, and return to take care of my little field and garden at home. In a year or two, Harold will be- come capable of more instruction than I shall be able to giv$ htm; and he shall then comeback to remind you of your benevo¬ lent promises, with sense enough, I hope, to acknowledge them as they deserve." "That is all very well/' said Arthur ;— " but what am I to do in the mean time ? I have fields, and a garden, to be sure, as well as you ; but I do not much care to take the trouble of looking after them ; and when you are gone, if you persist in going, 1 foresee my house will all go to confusion, and become the same pig's-stye again that it was when you first saw it." " It must be owned," returned she, with a smile, " your house was not in the most exact order. There was a litter of little porkers
porkers in the dairy, and a bro®d of young ducks in the best bed-chamber; not to mention that the colt and the two fillies took a walk every day in the flower-gar¬ den/* "You are very right/' replied Arthur.-— i{ And my victuals used to be so ill cooked, and so.dirty, that I never could eat above half my dinner. Now, had not you better stay where you are, and keep things a little tight and comfortable for me, in return for what I mean to do for my nephew ?'* " But it is very likely you will marry, brother, and then your wife will take those domestic cares off your hands." " Well, but stay, however, till I do marry, and then I will let you go." The good sense and good temper of his lister prevented her taking offence at this uncivil conclusion of an offer originally prompted by self-accommodation. She determined at once to contribute tohiscom- imU and avert his ruin, which she had had .sufficient
ififfiVlen't kisure to' observe #a$'fast ap* proarhing; and disposing of her cottage and the little property belonging to it, she established herself at Warkworth Grange; as her brother's house was stiled. There was, however, another circum¬ stance that contributed to make her resolve on this step. The visible improvements in Arthur Wallop's farm-yard and garden, that quick¬ ly followed her arrival, had occasioned an enquiry from Lady Rachel Winburne, then newly settled at Widdrington Tower, into their cause; and an acquaintance ensued between that lady and Wallop's sister, who soon became decidedly a favourite with her noble neighbour. Hence "five early in¬ timacy between Ethelred and his friend.— The former was never quite happy without Harold Wallop; and Harold, in return, .loved him and Lady'Hachel with all the affection of which a child was capable.— - i VOL. II. h How
inn a
ower o
ip that might in time es fo her son, while she strengthening it by fre-
V hen she related to Lady Kache! what bad passed between her brother and her¬ self, and the new regulation that had sue* ceeded, she had die pleasure to find that her decision was not only appro\ed of* but that it- communicated the liveliest sa¬ tisfaction : and during the eleven years that she continued to live at Warkworth Grange, she never had occasion to repent
e
But towards iod, finding h :ec ubject of he
b
expiration of that pe- health very rapidly giving extremelv anxious on the other's future comforts.
*' He has been so long accustomed/* said rhe one day to Lady Kachel, ** to have his hou&e
f*ousc clean, and his servants kept In or¬ der, that I know not what will become of him when I am no more. His discontent will be greater than if I had never lived with him/* " You should put it into his head to marry," said Lady Rachel.—" There is Ellen Ord, of Rothburv, would make him an excellent wife ; and she has such an un¬ comfortable home, with a drunken father. and an ill tempered mother, that I do nu think she would refuse him." " Hhe would just suit him/* said W.-u.op's sister. " But you should recollect, that l: he has a child of his own, Haroid will no longer be his heir." <•■ Very true ! hia it is likely he will spend his latter days with more credit and comfort, than, with his habits, it h possi!, ■ 3 he can do, without having some friend to oianage his affairs. And as to Harold, h's own good propensities will carry him ho-
noufabiy'through the world, even 'though. he should be without friends/* • " Which he shall never be," said Lady Rachel, tenderly embracing her.— <( He may rest assured of always having friends, who, for his own sake, as well as his mo¬ ther's, w*ili never forsake him." " Well, then/"* returned she, more than half seriously, " ! will pursue your advice, and strive to inspire him with courage to make an offer of his hand, for the first time in his life, though I fear mv undertaking will prove fruitless." It met, however, with rather more success in the commencement than she had expected. Arthur made no objection, when she begged leave to invite Ellen Ord for a few days to Warkworth, as an am us- ing companion to one in her infirm state of health. And after she was gone, when his sister observed to him what an admi¬ rable manager she would be, if placed at ihe head of his family, in case of her own death,
death, he did not express very strong- averseness to the scheme of proposing toi her; so that, in a short time, al&rraed bya his sister's failing looks, and her terrifying description of future bad dinners, disorder¬ ly servants, and wasted property, he suf-* fered her to persuade him to ride over to Rothbury, avowedly for the purpose of* making a tender of himself, and all he was . worth, to Ellen Ord. But unfortunately for the fcrnynation-' of his first and only adventure as a lover, the father of Ellen Ord was at that time even more prone than himself to submit to the potent influence of ^he staple li¬ quor of his country. Arthur, instructed" by his sister, had begged of Ellen, on his first arrival, that he might take a walk with her after dinner, across the fields ; and she, in consequence of a hint she had received. from her friend, while at Warkwcrth, mo¬ destly looked forward to a chance of quit¬ ting a very disagreeable home, resolving, l3 at:
at the same time, to be not more remiss in her duties as a wife than she had always been in those of a daughter. But while her mind was occupied by this expectation, Arthur was very differently' employed. The liquor was the very best he had ever tasted. Old Ord, who had spent the early part of his life at sea, was the most entertaining companion he had ever met with ; and Arthur swallowed and listened, and listened and swallowed, till he knew not whether he was in heaven or upon earth. He forgot the errand upon which he came, his sister, his farm, bis future dinner?, Ellen Ord, and himself.—• He even forgot it was time to go to bed, when he saw his hospitable host gradually sinking from his seat to the floor. Tri- nmphantly he sat on, till a serving-man entered to assist him to his chamber But he was in a mo^d to scorn assistance, and waving and flourishing his hands over his head, he bade the serving-man begone to Lucifer !
Lucifer! Certain portents, however; of in¬ ternal revolution, warned him to retire £ hut not content with a gradual progress up stairs, he chose a quicker mode of re¬ moval than he was equal to ; and making the same stride for two steps that would have sufficed for four, he fell against the sharp corner of a landing-place, and, iri his struggles to rise, tumbled over the staircase upon the ground floor, with sucl& force as to pat out his shoulder. It might naturally have beert expected th^t, after so serious a disaster, he would have submitted, with patience, to any au~ thority it was necessary to exercise over hiin; but that was so far from being the case with Arthur, that he now became more unruly than before. He took it info his head he had been* wilfully thrown from the staircase; and nothing which either the servant or Ellen's mother could say, for she had been drawn* l 4 thither.
thither by the noise"oUiisTall, in" any de- gree availed to remove bis mistake.— Maimed as he was, he-forced his way out of the house, vehemently swearing he Would not stav an hour under a roof where he had been so ill-treated"; and finding his own man at the stables, he persisted in mounting his horse, and riding home that night. The fellow, perceiving his master's condition, would have dissuaded him, but soon found he was talking to the- winds — liquor always rendered Arthur very obsti¬ nate: and he now resolutely determined to shew he could ride, which he believed his 'servant suspected he could not, At a furious rate, therefore, he set out; but the man had taken the sensible pre¬ caution of mounting him upon the slowest horse of the two ; and easily keeping pace with him, no accident happened till they reached a part of the road that ran for a few paces along the river side> Now
Now it unfortunately chanced, that near to Arthur's house was a small brook, where* he invariably watered his horse whenever he returned from riding; and still more' unfortunately, he now, on perceiving the moonbeams dancing on the river/fancied? he had reached home, and was about cross¬ ing this brook. Before the servant, could; even guess a* his intention, he plunged in, and a loud howl was the first intimation he gave of what had befallen him. It was in summer time; and the sedges and bul- rushes that grew in great abundance on the river's brink, saved his life; .hough he was not got out until he had undergone the most complete immersion ; frequently" ■ roaring out he was Moses, and that Pha¬ raoh's daughter ought to come and pre¬ serve him. No house was near; wet and dislocated, he had yet several miles to go before he ^ reached home. In a few hours he was in . a high fever, that confined him to his bed-i l 5 - inat.v
many weeks ; and when, with difficulty, he was recovered by the care and attentions of his sister, he had conceived such an aver¬ sion to the idea of ever becoming a suitor, and-perhaps felt so much ashamed when¬ ever he thought of his exploit at Rothbury, that no persuasions could ever induce him to hazard a second attempt. At the death of his sister, then.fore, which happened about half a year after thU accident, he was left in a very forlurn situ¬ ation. His nephew, whom he loved better than he loved any body else, now b,re arms, and was frequently from home, on skirmishing parties with Ethelred and ids rou&in, Henry Percy. Aithur had no re¬ sources within himself; and his dciecte-Tl apniaranie, when he occasionally accoiu- 4& A p.;ai (d i:arold to Widdringfon 'l\j\*'cr } ex¬ cited Lady Rachel's companion. He was invited to take up his abode there until he recovered his spirits, rnd he found the means of fuming this invitation to very ;> * good
good account; for by various little ser¬ vices, he rendered himself useful to Ber* tram, who mistrusted all his servants, save- only Scruton and his wife ; and he amusetl him with stories of all the petty trans¬ actions in the neighbourhood. He was mean enough to watch the domestics, at times when Bertram could not watch them himself and was a trusty spy who might always be depended upon. It will be supposed, that as he rose in ■ Bertram's favour, he sunk in Lady Rachel's*. Put so * mg as he could keep fair with the former, no other consideration gave hira anv uneasiness; and he maintained his ground with such skill and assiduity, that after his first long visit at Widdrington Tower, immediately succeeding his sister's death, he was &eidom absent from it above three days in succession.. His love of ease, therefore, was completely gratified ; he took no thought lor to-morrow; his nephew, young as he was, at intervals su- lU pertu tended.
mid he enjoyed better fare than he could ]po»ibiy have had at home; all at the-slender ^xpence, and a very slender one it was, in Arthur's, estimation, of being thought meanly of by Lady Rachel, and a few re¬ spectable persons in the vicinity, and being hated by all the servants at Widdrmgton Tower, excepting Scrutoh and Joyce. As to Bertram, he could no where have met with a companion more exactly suited to him; and Margiana soon discovered that not even Ethelred and Harold v\ere by nature more formed for intimacy than her uncle and Arthur. The latter never saw more than it was desired he should see ; am! provided he was well fed, he would endure to have any thing said to him, or be put upon any office whatsoever. * Yet after awhile, Margiana hardly des¬ pised him more than she did her uncle him¬ self; for in Bertram there was an .nborn meanness,
J
meanness, that all endeavours were fruitiest to conceal; and he made frequent attempts at behaving with a certain dignity-befitting his present rank, that exposed him to the secret derision of his nieces, who well knew real dignity to-be very unlike his imitation of it. It seemed as if he had thrown a fine robe loosely over his shoul- ders, and it was always flying open, not¬ withstanding all his efforts, and discovering a patched doublet underneath. The strut of a turkey he mistook for the graceful pride of a peacock. To the grcit mortification of the two sisters, the storm that began on the day of their friend's departure lasted three weeks; and the snow in general laid so deep, and was besides partially blown into such vast drifts, that it was impossible for them, during the greatest part of that period, to move beyond the limits of the castle, To Genevieve the time appeared tnsupportably, tedious. Never suffered to be alone with Margiana,
were no society for her. Lady Hachel con¬ tinued invisible, and she had met with a severe rebuff from Joyce, when she once introduced the subject of her cousin Ar¬ lette, and expressed the strong desire she felt to see her. Vainly did Margiana strive to support her spirits. She seemed sinking into a torpor of mind that some¬ times gave serious alarm to her sister, who, had she not hoped for brighter days, would now almost have wished her the wife of Lord Lothian.—"A life such as this," she would say, " is a burthen, not a blessing. Whv, therefore, when I lie down at night, need 1 wish to rise again in the morning r" If Margiana gently eh ided, and spoke of religion, and submission to the will of Pro¬ vidence, she stood corrected, and was silent; but she would retire to her closet, and sitting down on her coffin-bed, would give way o hopeless anguish. To
To counteract this growing and insi¬ dious melancholy, Margiana carefully with-. held from her all sucn objects as might en¬ courage it. She herself wished to see the brown tapestry chamber, that Bertram had once mentioned as having been occupied by her father, but she forbore asking to be indulged in her fancy, till one very gloomy afternoon, when Genevieve, having been kept awake by the head-ache most of the preceding night, had lain down to obtain an hour's repose. After a little hesitation. Jovce granted her request, and conducted her to the apartment. It was a large gloomy cham¬ ber, hung, as Bertram had described, with tapestry, that represented, in different shades of brown, stories from holy writ.—?. But the figures were horrible and gigantic, and the colours were so faded as to add to: the desolation that prevailed throughout the room. The windows were very high and narrow, and nothing w*>* to be seen from
from them but the murky sides of the black tower, with its turrets aspiring above ; and from one of them, a corner of the battle¬ ments of the castle. " This is a dismal chamber/' said Mar¬ giana.— e< Is it not a part of the black tower ? or rather, is not a part of the tower above it ?" Jovce hesitated, but at length said— 1f There is nothing above this apartment, lady/' Margiana now turned her eyes towards the oaken press, from whence her father's will had been taken, and saw lying upon it a cloak, the very same she well remcm- bered to have seen him wear that morning he had prevented her disturbing Lady Rothes, and had spoken to her so confiden¬ tially, on their returning home together. " AJas ! my dearest father, peace be with thy spirit/' said she, as she took up the cloak,
cloak, with mingled tenderness and re¬ spect, kissed it, and pressed it to her bo- som, - There were other articles of apparel iii the room that had belonged to him. She noticed them/all, and the sight of them r struck a sorrow to her heart, that could find relief only from tears. She was silently in-* dulging in them, though Joyce had already testified some impatience to begone, whefl; halfchoaked with her sensations, she was seized with a violent fit of coughing'; and almost immediately after it ceased, a loud lumbering noise w§s heard overhead, as if a heavy piece of furniture had been thrown down, " What is that?" exclaimed Margiana, starting. Joyce turned pale, and Margiana fancied she trembled.— " What is it?" repeated she, looking stedfastly at hei*. tf Some of the servants, I suppose/' re¬ plied
have blundered, and thrown something
f$
** But the noise was over our heads ; md you told me just now there was na chamber above this apartment." ft It is no concern of your's, whether ;here is or not; and I cannot stay here any onger to answer foolish questions. Come way, lady* or I shall leave you here, and
*»
argiana, making no answer, followed her out; but as the) returned to that part of the castle with which she was now be¬ come acquainted, she carefully observed every winding of the way, and every door as she passed it; noticing in particular a little narrow staircase, that looked as if it led to the chamber above, from whence
" If I live till this nij>ht/' she mentally :xclaimed—" this night I; will be here again.
again. Where there is so much mystery as* there is in this castle, all cannot be right/' She uttered t however, not a word ; and Ending her sister fast asleep, left her with¬ out making any noise, and went down into the room where Bertram was, the only place where she could be freed from the perse- cuting presence of Joyce. She found her uncle reading a letter to Arthur Wallop, that appeared deeply to in* tcrest him. He stopped on her entrance, and addressing her, said—" Here is dismal news just arrived, my dear niece ; such, I fear, as will sensibly afflict you, however you may have expected it/* He then putting the paper into her hands, she read with horror, but not with surprise, an account Kent by Ethelred tnhis fattier, of the murder of King Richard, at Pontefract Castle. He said it was the pre¬ vailing
vailing opinion that Sir Piers Ex to:;, and several ether assassins, had rushed upcii bins, and c!i>i;atched him with their wea- pons ; but that some persons, who were suspected of. being hater informed, had intimated his having been starved to dcaih in his prison.—" Of iht exact truth o£ either of these reports/' pursued Ethtlred, " I know nothing ; but Richard is certainly dead, and Lis murderers have as certainly drawn on themselves the abhorrence of Cjsod and man. Mv dear father, I would not be one of them for ail the treasurer of a Persian despot. \ fear this will be a se¬ vere shock to rny cousins. I pray \ou comfort them, and commend me to them both. The Kine keens me here constantly emplovod, in various ways ; and I have luit faint hopes of seeing you before the ap- proach of summer. But when I do come, 1 bone mv stav with you will not be a short one. I enclose a letter fo Ala; :»iaoa, wbi«.h 1 beg of you to present to her." Margiana,
v
Margiana, whov spiiitj had been so lately and so much de;uvssv-d, sat iv.ourn- fully down, lorded with grief, at the fav *>rker vvetdivd sovereign, and qtnte f t y* ,q«>t to ask for her own letter, til) Be« tram ^ uc ir t<> her. Its piinc.iiial s-ibje. t was the melancholy event Ethelred had com¬ municated to his fit her, thotnrh he -ratf- iii-y thanked her for her recollection of him when Wallop returned to London,
?':e bdd it down \:pn n :.-.e t?h? c> Am- she h:id read ir, without speakin r; whilyt Ber¬ tram, as if respecting nei feelin-s, talked to Arthur Wallop of indifferent co-;cen^, till
I
:-e supper was brought in by the teniLIe
^ /* i* 11 4 j r **
" !-°!:iFi a coi:i;(rii.-,n<'c as /?<«/, probably is Sir Pier; KxtouV," tho.r;l, t Margiana, as
1 *" C sne gazed at l-dm with di^ust and d'
smav
ertram, enquiring for Genev
t
j eve, she x
explained the cause of her absence, and strove, when pressed by her uncle, to cat; but it was in vain she attempted to swal¬ low, and a feverish tu>-ton ess f.iJitened round her tempks. Yet recollecting her meditated scheme for ihe night, she would T,o f excite any suspicion by retiring earlier than usual. She continued, therefore, be¬ low', till her uncle himself seemed disposed to nst, and then followed Joyce, inwardly pra\ing that she might soon be buried in profound repose. When left alone, instead of undressing, she went to a little closet, on one side of her w^de chimney, where she had formerly seen some old books upon a shelf, and tak- in«- one of them down, after having exa- mined the subjects of two or three, she found It to be a collection of old Italian tales, in their original language. She un- der* toou r? >t.- ^eu n'-> tier ovsii ; aiut fie- slrc-us of putting ojT die iiinc till it was likely
likely Joyce mi^hf be a deep, by any mean? Vwt could prevent h^r from broodinsr over the -id cafnsiroph? she had just le.irned, .'*■.- ;<f down by Ihe side of her be 1, and '■ i-^ing her !^ np, began to read the story tLuCarst occurred. It waseiititled ■ AiiltiU^gjUjiUlFiiua J'liS 50T OF M.l\f0*72)3. "The churches of the city of Urbino had struck mi<Iii!g!it, and a pr .found stillness prtv.iiled. The streets v\e *e deserted. No hum:in form was to be seen, save one who wrapped in the cowl and coarse vcotments of a mendicant friar, paced the pavement with slow and measured steps. Yet some¬ times he stepped, and raised his c\es to Heaven, from whence a drizzling rain des¬ cended, and then resumed his pace, strik¬ ing his arm across his bosom. At length, {pitting the broad and handsome ^Irvcix he repaired to the vilest part of the city, and
and turned-di)wn a mean- alley, wher." he approached the door of a $nv>d\ low house. Here he paused, and looked around to see if he was observed by any pa^nger who mh r ht chance still to be wandering at this undue hour. But no person could be Keen. From under his garment he drew a key, that was stained with blood. " "lis much if the lock has not been changed/' *aid he. -« " If it has, I must have recourse to other measures." He cautiously tried it. It unlocked the door; and making no noise, he crept for¬ ward, feeling his way, * : ll he reached a se- i-ond, that was shut only by a latch, which he lifted up, and listened.—All was silence. " Gaetano Cuprogli!" said he.—No answer was returned. He advanced a few paces. Some half- extinguished embers were dying on the hearth, and a faint noise wa* heard, a", ot some one oppressed by uneasy sleep. " Gaetano
reputed the
" Who calls ?" aaid a shrill, birt tremu¬ lous voice. (i Your friend, the friar Cellino, to whom you have given alms. I come, in reward of your charity, to reveal to you a concealed treasure. Arise, while the night h dark. Follow me, and 1 will conduct you to it." lie heard the man he had awakened pre¬ paring to rise; yet he paused, and asked the iriar of what, the treasure consisted I *' Of precious.stones/'' he replied; "but principally of a box of diamonds, the'pu, rest that ever left the mines of Golconda. !>o you not work for the lapidaries ?"' " Yes/' the man returned, tremulously striking a light, for he was old and decre¬ ed, and presented a tying picture of pe~ nury.—« Yes, but I"ke«p a few jewels myself/*
iou sbll have these/' pursue! the Vf) F If '* inar.
fnir, * € if you will continue to me your alms every day when it is high mass, at the church of San Pietro*- '!■ have made a vow of poverty, and dare not touch them my¬ self. But come, be speedy, or the morn¬ ing will dawn ere we accomplish our pur¬ pose/ 8 The old jeweller hastily threw on his clothes, and was preparing to follow his guide, when he suddenly stopped, and en¬ quired by what means he had gained ad¬ mittance ? ** By magic,** answered the friar.—"I am acquainted with certain words that have the power of makiiig any door fly op<m.-~ Without their assistance, we could not ap¬ proach the treasure/' But, as he recrossed the threshold, he carefully concealed and secured the bloody ley. The jeweller dosed the door of his house, and they proceeded in silence, as the friar led to a distant part of the city.— Their
Their way laid through the market-place, from whence many streets branched out in a variety of directkms. Here the friar halted. t( Gaetano," said he, " you shall go no further, unless you submit to have your eyes covered. I know to whom the trea¬ sure belongs, and I will not put myself too much in your power, in case it should be massed." "Have we much farther to go?" said Gaetano, hesitating. * r No," replied 4he friar. Gaetano, after a little consideration, consented; and they went on, the friar leading him. t( You are rich," said the mendicant, "•though you are believed to be poor, even by those lapidaries who employ you. f know you possess much more than the savings of your labour can amount to.—- Whence originally proceeded your wealth ?" k $ * Frcm,
i€
wife, considerably older than you, who succeeded to his property, and his trade as ajeweller, and you was the youngest of eleven, by his second, who were all- left to n their own exertions for a
** *
• Very true/* replied Cuprogli, who, aring the mendicant speak of circum¬ stances that had passed so many years be¬ fore, began to fear he was possessed of re magic than sufficed for opening oors*—-" Yon say very true," returned he; but ( my eldest brother took me, when a puth* 'towork for him; and as Iserved im ifaithfully, he left me a handsome
J>
" How ! 4© the impoverishmeirt' mf his own .ehiklres ? For ,he had three -sons.
jvfiuril^ wisu yoiu
*u
Who
fe Who continued with me, and I took- care of him/' interrupted Cuprogli. " And where is he now ?" t( 1 know not. He ran away from me long ago. He a fterwards sent for ■■'his bro¬ thers to come to him, and I have never heard of him or them since." " Stop here," said the friar, " we have . reached the place."—Here is. a door to open." He pronounced three Turkish words.?—* They went through, and advanced along k dark passage. " Halt again I" criect the mendicant-** *' You are now going to descend some stairs; be careful; count the number of steps; Now you are at the landing-place. How manv 7 were there ?" fi Seven/' replied Gaetano. " Go on,—Here are some more. Count these also. What is their number V *' iMve/'said Guiirogli, trembling " You are right. Now tell me to which m 3 hand
hand we must turn fo reach the remaining " f know not/* answered Cuprogli, in a famt voice u If is false," said the friar, solemnly ;— " yon know full well. If yoa refuse to speak, 1 leave you here in darkness, to pe¬ rish with hunger. To which side must we turn ?" "O Santo Reneditto!" exclaimed the old man, (i abandon me not! There are lD«r steps on the left of us" u Come on then," said the friar; " I will lead yow." A pfofound silence ensued. They tra¬ versed a second passage, and arrived at the top of four steps, The old man shook so violently in every joint, that the friar almost supported hirn to the bottom. He then conducted him through rmother door, which opened into n sm'd! vaulted room, wherein stood a lamp, Burning upon an old chest,. decaying with damp
damp and age, at either end of which sat a man dressed in black. ts Push the covering from your eyes," said the friar, "and look around you." As well as his shaking hands could per^ form their office, CuprogH obeyed; but his glazed eyes beheld no ebject. He moved not, nor raised them from the ground, " Look up," said the friar.— rc There stands a chest in yonder corner. Go to if. Examine its- contents. Perhaps you wilk find the treasure there." The old man, stiffening into an attitude of horror, stood still. # The two men in black slowly arose, placed the lamp upon the floor, a.id raised' the lid of the chest. The friar drew from his bosom the key that was stained with blood, and holding h up before Cup¬ rogli, sternly said—" Is riot this key more than it appears ? U there not a dagger con¬ cealed within its shaft?"
M * Gaetano
Gaetano uttered a shriek^ and fell to the ground. " Villain!" exclaimed the mendicant, seizing him in bis powerful grasp, <c with this infernal instrument, and in this ac¬ cursed place, didst thou murder him who fostered thee, and made thy prey of his possessions, defrauding his helpless chil¬ dren. Behold ali that is left of his sad re¬ mains, long ago mouldered in yonder chest of death 1 I am the eldest of thy ne- phewsj he whom thy cruel treatment forced upon a pitiless world, to avoid stai /ing at home. Unobserved by thee, I had watched thee, and seen thy guilt, though I bu¬ ried the consciousness of it in mine own breast till I should be able to take revenge. Twcntv-seven years have I been in Egypt, a &lave to the followers of Mahomet, but in every danger I preserved this key of the door of my father's dwelling, trusting, since it had a duplicate, that the lock might not be changed ; and I never, for an hour, lost srght
sight of my design. When my brothers discovered and released me, I returned, to accomplish it with them, and now thy last moments are at hand.* 1 At the instant that he ceased, the two vou user brothers rushed forward, and the iid of the chest falling down with a loud .noise, the pretended friar shook the con¬ cealed dagger from the key, and plunging it into the throat of the wicked Cup- rogli —-— « " Just as Margiana had read thus far, she heard an unusual sound at the remote end of her chamber, which was involved in darkness. She listened; it paused near a minute, and she fancied she had been mis¬ taken ; but it recurred, and she was con¬ vinced of its reality. c he raised her lamp, and directed its fcebbTays towards the ob¬ scurity, but nothing wa* discernible, ex-
cept, she thought, a gentle waving of the hangings, as if some person was behind them. Her eyes fixed upon the spot, she tfood without motion ; and presently a division in the arras, which she had never observed before, was cautiously opened, and from it issued a man, enveloped from head to feet in a long black cloak. Her immediate suspicions fell upon Scruton, and she believed he was come with a design to murder her. Instinctively the shrieked; and flying from him, still holding the lamp, reached the first door of the armoury, which she had the presence of mind to secure, with all its bobs, notwith¬ standing the man's assurances that he in¬ tended her no evil, and his vehement en¬ treaties that she would stay and hear him. Deaf to every plea but that of terror, she speeded across the armourv, and down the &tairs towards the great hall* in hopes her
her uncle might not yet be gone to rest, without reflecting, that if indeed the per¬ son who had alarmed her was Scrufon, and that he came with a wicked design, he was probably authorised by Bertram himself! As she reached the door leading into the hall, this frightful idea occurred to her ; and overcome with dread, her feet faltered when she would have turned back, to re¬ pair to her sister's apartment. Half faints ing, she was forced to lean against the door. An instant sufficed to recover her, but the noise had disturbed those within, and it was immediately opened by Scruton himself,, followed by her uncle, fear and surprise in the looks of both. In accents of dismay, Bertram asked her the cause of her alarm, and with tolerable coherence she related what she had seen ; but the instant he understood she had fas¬ tened her door on the outside, w'thout waiting
waiting to hear another word, he bade her stay in the hall till his return, snd hastened with Scruton up stairs. They found the door of the armourv bolted, as when she had left it, but bevcnd it, within her chamber, no person was to be found ; and every part of the room, and every thing in it, appeared in its usual state. They examined the hangings, at the further end, from whence she described the apparition to have issued, and they found the division she had spoken of. The wall, however, was solid, behind it, and conti¬ nued so as far as it proceeded. But where a partition of wood inteivened, dividing the adjoining apartment from Margiana's, Scruton discoveied a panne) that $.avc way to his pressure. He pushed it back, and passed through the \acancy with ease, Ber¬ tram still following. Their expectations were raised; but in the
the next room nothing was to be seen of unusual appearance. l\vo doors led front it, and they divided, to examine beyond them both ; but only Bertram had a light, and theirseveral search was vain. After spending a considerable time, to no purpose, they returned into the hall, where they (oxmd Margiana waiting in the utmost anxiety, which was rather height¬ ened than dispelled, by their report of the UI success they had met with. "You must sleep no more in that apirt- rnent," said Bertram, " until it is rendered 5crure. For she remainder of this night, 1 make no doubt you will condescend to a share of Jovce's bed, and Scruton shall sit up to watch the atenucs of the castle. Margiana made no objection to this ar¬ rangement, which, afc any other time, might have inspired her with inexpressible difigllJrt, 6
4isgust^ but suffered her uncle, unresisting¬ ly, to conduct her himself to Joyce's room, where she retired to hed with the least pos¬ sible noise, for fear of disturbing her sister in the adjoining closet, from whom %\u* de¬ termined carefully to conceal this alarming adventure.
&K9 Of VOU St.
lane, Darling, and Co, Lcadenhati Street.
