Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
Margiana: or, Widdrington tower: a tale of the fifteenth century
*
CHAT*, t How to lo$e a Nation's L&vc^-Family Pict&rts, A HE history of few nations can present a ■■ more unfortunate reign than that of Richard the Second of England, The years imme¬ diately succeeding his early accession to the throne were rendered sanguinary and tumultuous, by the constant struggles for power between the haughty Barons of that ferocious period and the unworthy minions on whom the young sovereign lavished his favours with unsparing and indiscriminat- ing hand, The slight hope he had given vol, i, b of
of future courage and conduct, when, with a presence of mind not unworthy of more exalted abilities, he had quelled the popular insurrection at Shiithtield, was soon blighted by his subsequent actions; and the guilt imputed to him in the suspected murder of bis uncle, the Duke of Gloucester, at Calais, encreased that unpopularity his treatment of the Duke of Hereford was destined to complete. After the death of the Duke of Gloucester, bitter feuds soon divided those nobles who had joined in the prosecution against him ; and the animosity between the Dukes of Norfolk and Hereford was such as arms only could terminate. A challenge being offered and accepted, the lists, with the consent of the King, were appointed at Coventry; but when the preparations were all com¬ pleted, the numerous spectators assembled, and the combatants prepared, Richard, with unaccountable versatility, commanded them to desist, forbade the fight, and banished the
the Dtike oC Norfolk to Italy for life, and the Duke of Hereford for ten vears to France; remitting, however, four years of the exile of the latter, on his submissive behaviour, and granting him letters patent, empowering him to enter into immediate po session of any inheritance that might fall to him during the period of his banish¬ ment, without waiting until h"i3 return should enable him to do homage for it. No sooner, however, was the Duke of Hereford gone, than the King seemed to repent his concessions, and to feci alarm lest that nobleman's influence should be¬ come too formidable for a subject. In the following year, he prevented his marriage with a princess of France, by sending over the Earl of Salisbury to represent him as an exiic, who would never be suffered to return to his native country; and, forget¬ ting the laws of honour, to indulge his fears, or to gratify his animosity, he ex¬ tended his injustice still farther/when the 15 •' Duke
Duke of Lancaster, Hereford's father, died t by revoking his letters patent, and seizing the inheritance that should have descended to his son. Other acts of oppression, with daily in¬ stances of the frivolity of his character, which immersed him in dissipated pleasures, and challenged contempt, soon destroyed the little popularity Richard had ever pos¬ sessed : while the injuries and the abilities of Henry of Lancaster became proportion- ably the theme of every tongue. The people of England recalled to their minds -the warlike reign and vigorous government of Edward,the Third/the present monarch's grandfather, and lamented anew the loss the nation Isad sustained in the early fate of the gallant Black Prince. They mur¬ mured at Richard's degeneracy from such immediate ancestors, and sighed for a so¬ vereign who, superior to effeminate indul¬ gences,, might once more lead a martial nation forth to war and conquest, A cir-
4 circumstance, that at this time took. place, proved eventually favourable to the* wishes of the people, and to the Duke of Lancaster, who was become their idol. Ait insurrection broke out in Ireland, and the presumptive heir to the crown- the Earl of March, was slain there in a skirmish; at which the King- was so enraged, that he determined to go over to punish the in¬ surgents in person, contrary to the advice of all those who wished well to him, and were desirous of peace to the state.. Few in number were these loyal and moderate-minded men; but of all the nobility who still continued attached to Richard, the warmest of his adherents, and the most faithful to him upon principle, was Winburne, Earl'of Widdrington, of ex¬ tensive influence and princely possessions. Educated from, his earliest youth, either ia the hardy region of a camp, or beneath the shade of the palace, he was ardently devoted to the family that now sat on the throne, b 3 and
mid reflected with stieh enthusiasm ©n the glories of the former reign, that, in hk eyes, they even east a brightness on the supine inactivity of Richard. He had fought, when a youth, with young Edward at Cressy, and would have forfeited every earthly possession sooner than have be¬ trayed or abandoned the cause of his son. In his temper he was warm, open, and unsuspicious. Generous and noble minded, he gave Credit to others for the good qua¬ lities with which he was gifted himself. As a soldier he had been brave; as a leader had manifested as much skill as the tumultuous mode of fighting in those days could admit of; and his honour as a statesman had never been overcast by a blemish. - Such was the favourable side of the Earl of Widdrington's character; and could we stop here, all were well. But as it is the memoirs of his family we are entering upon, it is necessary now to introduce the mem¬ bers of it. He
He ha«l married, early in Hfe, a young woman of exquisite beauty, delicate con¬ stitution, indigent circumstances, and noble connexions. She was niece to the Earl of Lothian, a Scottish chief, and, till .within a few weeks of her marriage, had lived in retirement with heu nrotheri Lord Lothian's sister, who had forfeited the favour of her family by uniting her fate with that of a very worthy private gentleman, not one of whose ancestors had ever been distinguished by a title. Kle had been.dead-several years $ and his widow and the young and lovely Margaret had existed in calm obscurity, aeg^cted and almost forgotten by theisr noble kindred, when the latter received an unexpected summons from her uncle, fhen , iii London*. Beauty and unsophisticated manner* must always be attractive. They had a powerful effect on the ever susceptible heart of Lord Widdrington^ who at that time was under age, and the Earl of Lothian's ward; andj ia something more than three b & weeks
weeks after her arrival in England, Margaret became the Countess of Widdrington. But her intrinsic merits were insufficient to retain the affections her exterior had won. The charm of novelty overpast, the mildness of her unpretending manners ap¬ peared insipid to him who had lived a i'^c of variety in camps and courts; her gentle temper he could have wished exchanged for a disposition of wilder vivacity; and her good sense he was too little at home, and partook of too little of her conversation, to appreciate as it deserved, or even, per¬ haps, to discover, for in his presence it was restrained by her timidity; so that she* who to persons indifferent to her could, whenever she chose, be seen in a favourable point of view, never appeared to advantage to the only person she was solicitous to please. But it was seldom she did chuse to meet the public eye. Precarious health, and the birth of a daughter soon after her marriage,
marriage, united, with Lady Widdrington's - love of retirement, to confine her at home; and her spirits were depressed by the fre¬ quent and sometimes long absences of the Earl. Many of these were voluntary; and one journey, in-particular, that he made into Scotland/kept him abroad. several months, though Lady Widdrington was aware he was- not detained there by any negociation depending between the two monarchs, or anV'Other affair of state what* - ever, She retired at this period into the coun¬ try with her infant Margiana; and before her return to Londoiv two- years after, a second daughter, named Genevieve, afforded her additional domestic employment, with¬ out seeming to impart a stronger sense of domestic duties to Lord Widdrington* Yet, as his daughters grew up, and he hid no other child, he imbibed so strong* an affection for them, and particularly for the-eldest, as delighted his wife, even while b 5 she
she grieved that she herself partook so little of his lotfe. Lord Widdrington having no son, the presumptive heir of his title, and the greater part of his property, was his only brother, Bertram Winburne; though, owing to the early death of his father, occasioning to himself along minority, the personal estate was very considerable ; and this he always declared his intention of dividing between his daughters. Very little intercourse subsisted between Bertram and himself Their tempers were uncongenial, and their characters wholly opposed. Bertram was cool, cautious, and forecasting, Subject to few passions, the few he submitted to he could always con¬ ceal when he thought fit. But there were trther things he could not do,—He could not place confidence in any one ; he could not forgive an injury; and he could not believe cither that men were naturally 5 honest
' honest or women virtuous. He believed in honour as a Christian believes in the divine mission of Mahomet; and thought there was no security from either sex but in never giving credit to ihe professions of the one, and in confining the other from all intercourse with society. Yet his own immediate connexions might have destroyed any prejudices less strongly rooted than were those of Bertram Winburne. The character of his brother we have already seen. That of his wife had qualities equally amiable, and w T as far more free-Jrom defect. She had been an heiress of the noble house of Percy, and inherited the generous spirit ami undaunted firmness of mind that distinguish* ed the line from which she sprung. Superior to the suspicions and cold caution of her husband, she excelled him as much in real judgment as she fell short of him in the ait of dissimulation ; and the same good sense which shewed her his error whenever they differed in opinion, which it must be sup- b G posed
posed they often did, made her avoid con~ te&t, either when the point in dispute was immaterial, or when she found it likely to be of no avail One circumstance, and one only, had proved a frequent subject of debate between them; and that, in Lady Rachel's estimation, was of too great im¬ portance to be lightly given up; it was the education of their daughter, which Bertram chose should be private, even to a degree of total seclusion from the world; while.her mother, with more enlarged ideas, and more liberal sense, wished her to be acquainted with her fellow-mortals, and vainly endeavoured to persuade the pre^ judsced and narrow-minded Bertram, that k is ignorance, and uot knowledge, that oftenest leads to evil. Her daughter, there- toe,, was a constant source of uneasiness to tar* though-pleasing in appearance, pro- 2*jt»ii8g in disposition, and so little subject to the depression that close confinement, with very few indulgences, would have induced 00 many young minds, that, on the con¬ trary^
trary, her spirits were light as air, and her playful vivacity, when not checked by her father's presence, wilder than the young fawn of the mountains* But if was precisely this vivacity and this restraint that caused many an anxious thought to Lady Rachel, who looked for¬ ward with appi^ehensions she did not en¬ deavour to conceal, to the time when the lively and high-spirited Arlette must neces¬ sarily be brought forward to an acquain¬ tance with the world. She did not fear that inaction would subdue her affections, or benumb the faculties of her mind; but she dreaded le§t the bow that had been always bent might not be unstrung without danger—that the bird which had been too long confined xnight never safely be trusted to its own pinion. If Arlette, however, was a subject of mistrust to one parent, and of anxiety to the other, the confidence of Bertram, and the
the deHght of Lady Rachel, equally rested* on Ethelred, their only son, a youth of '* golden promise/* for he inherited no partr of his father's character; and the Heroes of the Percy name were proud of calling him their kinsman. He had fleshed his maiden aword in the border wars, with his cousin, the gallant Hotspur. The Douglas acknow¬ ledged his merits with the liberal esteem of a generous foe, and Hotspur loved him as at brother. Another brave and neighbouring youta divided Ethelred's friendship with his cousin, Henry Percy; his name was-HaroldWallop; When these three were not necessarily parted by circumstances, they were rarely seect asunder. Bertram Winburne constantly resided at Widdrington Tower, a very strong fortress on the coast of Northumberland, around which the principal property of the Wid- dringtoa family was situated. His brother, whose
whose inclination, as well as his employ¬ ments, detained him near the person of his . sovereign, seldom had the leisure, and still seldomer felt the wish, to visit his northern possessions; while Bertram, who, fifteen years before, had fancied he received a slight from King Edward the Third, was equally averse to fill any station at a court where he might be still more liable to neglect from a young and thoughtless monarch, whose smiles were engrossed by giddy favourites of his own age. His pride was therefore gratified by the lofty retire¬ ment of Widdrington Tower, where the continued absence of the chief of his house occasioned him to be looked tip to us a petty sovereign. While Lord Widdringtori, who thought better of Bertram than he deserved, and was glad to have his domains overlooked by so near a connexion, was no less pleased by his abode there.
CHAP,
ffiS-
GHAP. II. Hors? to avoid Jlepentance-^Cabhut CounciL If the characters of Lord Widdrington and his brother Bertram .were different, those of Margiana and Genevieve, the daughters of the i former, were scarcely less so; yet both were amiable. At the-time when the Duke of Hereford should have succeeded to his father's possessions, as well as to the title of the Duke of Lancaster, which-he immediately assumed,' Margiana had jqst completed her twentieth year; but her understanding, naturally of the first order> had attained a maturity unusual at that period
period of life. To this various circiun- &tinces had contributed. Lady Widdring¬ ton, who was a woman of fine sense, ha# taken fhe utmost pains to impress her young mind with the strongest and clearest notions of what was right; and the seri^mpriniciples Margiana had imbibed from herwere those, not of bigotry, but of pure and true reli¬ gion, unalloyed with the blind superstition of the times. From, Lord Widdrington* whose conduct as a father never deviated from correctness, Margiana received ad¬ vantages of a different nature—true notions of honour, such as befitted either sex; liberality of mind, a knowledge of, the world, and a just appreciation of it: so that at her first introduction into public life, which was accelerated by the pride Lord Widdrington took in exhibiting his favour¬ ite daughter, and the delight he received from the admiration she excited, she was neither childishly charmed by the novelty of the scene around her, nor di$|- sed superstitiously
meBts of the court* But ^hat principally contributed to give MarfiaBa dibits of thinking hardly tx> be expect! from her years, were the redactions forced upon her* mind by the un,happiness of her uncomplaining mother. Strongly attached to her father p$ she was, she could rtot be blind to his faults, »©r insensible to the dejection of the silen t sun%rer before her. Instances of Lord Widdrington's infidelity were frequent, while his Begkct of his -wife, though he neve? believed harshly to her, was never interrupted by any act of kindness to her-* §elf as am individual. Yet at no time, and t& HO person* was she ever heard to complain. Even while her spirit seemed broken, and her health destroyed by internal Anguish, #he spoke to her daughters of their father as of an object of veneration and love;' 3P4 Margiana's tmnd iwas strengthened and improve4
improved in every feminine virtue by het» mother's precepts and example* while hep heart bled for the woe it was the chief study of her life to alleviate. Genevieve was cast in a softer mould. Of a fragile and delicate frame, with more ®f beauty than her sister, she had less of character. When she beheld her mother's pallid cheek and dejected eye, she grieved at her unhappiness, and wished it removed; but when the tokens of it were not imrne-* diately under her observation, she thought no more of them, until they were recalled fo her memory through her senses. Her imagination seldom led her beyond the surface of any subject. The last argument she heard was always the most convincing; consequently the impressions she received were strong, but, excepting in one instance^ never lasting. Matters of moment, to her, were trifles, and trifles matters of moment. While she was deliberating, Margiana waa resolving. Genevieve sometimes though*, but
but Margiana always reflected. With this> undecided character, she had more of Lady Widdrington's compassion whenever she recollected the short period that was likely to be put to her own life, and less of her father's consideration than her sister; yet he loved her; and it was impossible to do otherwise, for her heart was good, her temper the sweetest and most docila imaginable, and there was fascination irt her mild and gentle manners. Her attach¬ ment to her sister was one of the liveliest of her feelings; and, with a hunrrlity not often observable in inferior understand* ings, she placed the utmost confidence in> her judgment*, which she acknowledged; to be stronger than her own; as freely* as if the confession was flattering to her¬ self. The affectiojsr with which Margiana re** turned the tenderness of this gentle girl was no less warm and sincere ; and at no time of their Uvea did an idea of rivalship eirer* , - disgrace^.
disgrace, for a moment, the bosom pf either. Genevieve knew Lord Widdrington loved Margiana better than herself; and she used to say it would have been surprising if he had not—" For my sister," she observed, " possesses every good quality that I have, in a much greater degree than myself, and adds to them all those wherein I am de¬ ficient/' Lady Widdrington always treated them both with the strictest impartiality. They were both handsome and elegantly formed; but sense and expression gave the character of Margiana's beauty, while that of Genevieve's was delicacy in the extreme. Margiana, as has been already mentioned, was introduced at an early age to the court. It was upon the occasion of King Richard's marriage with thePrincessIsabella of France^ in whose service Margiana was immediately engaged, to attend personally on her. The amiable qualities of the young Queen soon won the sincere regard of those ladies who. had
intimately,* and Margiana in a short time became crordialfy attached to her royal Srsis&ess. Her sphere of observation was now con* slderably enlarged; and in her private con¬ versations with her mother, whose health very rarely permitted her attendance at the palaee, when she recapitulated the occur¬ rences of the day, or the events that fell within her knowledge, she had the benefit of that judicious parent's remarks on the characters of the persons to whom they related. th£ eonrtrers of King Richard, readily a&irttilatrfrg their habits of life to those of theiif master, were gay, thoughtless, and #ssipated. Many of them were abandoned to the mdst licentious pursuits, and not few m number ^Vere the married nobility who* ranked in this latter class. " Alas!" thought > Margfcma, v?hen daily instances of therr dissolute
tlisfeolute manners were mentioned as com¬ mon occurrences, " well may these insects who flutter in the sunshine, incapable of any higher thought than of what they shall eat and wherewithal they shall be clothed, —well maV they tun the heedless and wicked course of dissipation, when my noble father, in every other respect the most perfect of human beings, is borne down the headlong torrent/* Several of her young companions were. united, with the fairest prospect of happi¬ ness, to men who, professing the steadiest attachment to them, had not yet developed the worst features of their characters. Yet many of these young women she beheld afterwards made wretched, by the incon¬ stancy, the bad temper, or the thoughtless extravagance of their husbands. She could " not forbear cbnsitrering them as", victims suffering the punishment of their'credulity; and the men who destroyed that peace tl\6y ought to have guarded, as wild "beasts'who * ' concealed
concealed their fan^ and sheathed their claws, imtil they had an opportunity of fatally exercising them both. No man's conversation in society was more delightful than Lord Widdrington's, He had seen a great deal of tlu world; had been much in Italy, at that period advanced in elegant refinements near a century be¬ fore any other country in Europe; his memory was good to retrace the scenes he had past through; and his turn of mind, whoa not engaged on subjects of serious import, animated and playful. Thus gifted, he was the inspiring soul of the circle that surrounded him, and every eye brightened at hh approach. Yet this was the man who, while he delighted strangers and common acquaintances, took no thought for the happiness of a faultless wife, whom he rarely saw, more rarely conversed with, and to whose existence he seemed wholly indifferent Those who, unacquainted with the interior of Lord Widdrington's mansion, only
rnlv saw him abroad, believed him posses¬ sed of every good as well as every pleasing qualitv, and gave him credit for the s-ime charming manners at home that rendered him thc delight of public life. But Margiana knew it was otherwise, and, judging most men to be at least a** able dissemblers as her father, believed appearances were ge¬ nerally fallacious; and even when she fell into com pan v with a man of conversation more agreeable than usual, felt involuntarily disposed to doubt the happiness of hi:> ncar- esf Connexion a. rilled with 'hc^e sentiments, ■\shic h seemed too we'l founded to be called pre¬ judices, Margiana was not likely to listen with very implicit faith to the assurances of never-ending attachment which several of the young nobility lavished on her with extravagant expressions ol' passion. Her manners wei tj vatic and courteous to all, but encouraging to none; and her sincerity was so apparent, that al!, soon convinced of voi. :, c the
the in efficacy of their application, with¬ drew their suits, with the exception of one yotttig man, who persisted to belie\c *hat perseverance might overcome her indiffer¬ ence, and declared, that as long as she continued to reject the proposals of others, he would not despair for himself This was the son of the jEarl of Lothian, who had been her father'? guardian during his minority—a youth only a few months older than herself; but of all tho.e who had ad¬ dressed her, the least likely to make a favourable impression. The only son of a father who doated upon him, he had never been subjected to contradiction or to pu¬ nishment; and of a father, too, who having been always busily employed in politics or war, had entrusted the education of his heir to flattering and servile dependants. The consequence was such as might be expected. The seeds of an hereditary disposition soon shewed themsehes springing above the surface of the ..oil; besides which, his con¬ stitution unfortunately was delicate, and his mother.
MAKGIANA, mother, who, while she li\ed, which was til! he was about seventeen, had existed in a state of perpetual terror for his life, was much more intent on^pre^erving him from real or imaginary dangers, than on sup¬ plying that deficiency of attention with which 1 Lord 1 Lothian- might so justly have been reproached. * <* Vet with the advantages- of a proper education, this wilful youth mi^ht have proved a worthy and respect-able - man. Lafse indulgence >had not entirely spoiled a temper naturally-good, mi: q&he corj. rupted his heart. , His pef^nal coy rage, 11 o t e ve n h is t en d er - mot her *s n u yau\ g ca r«s had been able tc*Bubdue; and his'attaclv ment to Margiana, which was sincere, <pro- served him for a time from plunging j nt0 that excess ofolicentiotis dissipation which the? examples of so many men olderrthjj himself seemed to authorize: This, however,, to one who reflected as Margiaiia reflected! was very slender security. »Ile-ptwYcises r $ onstancy
constancy now," said she, "and perhaps the promise comes from his heart ; but when he is married, w*hat means will his wife possess ta enforce the performance of it, should that heart change ? And if it does, it is not likely a ymnag iman who has never been accustomed to say to hknself, / must not eh this, should be deaf to its imperious dictates, or attempt to check it in its course." Vain, therefore, were all this passionate admirer's proteststvotis, and vain the wild and frantic* ^alljes^ his disappointed love broke out into, Unaccustomed to have thc ^ratification of any wi*>h withheld, patience '*&$& an insupportable lesson to learn; and "tfhiie he one day adored Margiana, and -would have consigned himself to perdition to obtm\ her, the ne&t he almost fancied &he was the object of his detestation. Often lie applied to Lord Widdrington; bwt he ,osily laughed at hitn s b^de him depend on. Jsis own endeavours for success, and said he should entrust his daughter*© her own dis¬ cretion.
cretton. The more vehemence the morti¬ fied lover displayed, the more Margiana shrunk from the idea of uniting- herself for life with such a whirlwind; tilt at length it fairly seemed a contest for the prize of perseverance between them, the one con¬ tinuing as steadily to solicit as the other to refuse, Loul Lothian,, who was very far advanced in life, and labouring und^r a disorder that daily threatened to terminate it, could take no part in the concern, and considering his son's youth, which promised him many years to come, seemed very feebly interested in the event* Soon after the admission of Margiana into the service of the young Queen, Lord Widdrington one morning came to his daughter in an antirehamber of the palace, with an open letter in his hand.' " Alas, for Lord Lothian's son I" cried he. " Here is what will put an end to all his hopes, if he still persists, in defiance of whatever you can say, to preserve any/' c3 He
lie then proceeded to inform Margiana, that a messenger had just brought thc paper he held from Widdrington Tower; and on his putting it into her hands, ?he perceived it was written by her uncle Bern am. The former part of it treated solely of the growing discontents of the north, where the minds of the people, violently alienated from Kin*r Richard, led them almost openly to wish for the return of Henry of Lancaster, Bertram did not affect to conceal that his sentiments were wholly congenial to theirs*; and many were the arguments he used to persuade his brother how fortunate it would be for the mation if, without the shedding of too much blood, a change upon the throne could be effected. But this was not the only subject of his letter. From praising the Duke of Lancaster, he proceeded to the encomiums he had heard bestowed on his eldest niece, and to the commendations he thought she merited for her voluntary rejec'on of many of the gay young courtiers who had, as he had
had been informed, solicited her hand, and which, he saul, argued a most rare discre¬ tion. The primipal purpose for which he had written now appeared. It was to pro¬ pose a mania-re between Margiana and his son, Ethelred, which would concentrate alj the wealth of the family, and for which a dispensation; on account of their being cousin-germaus, mi^hi be easily obuined. On the darlh.g theme of Ethelred*s per¬ fections, he forsook his usual cold and guarded stile; and after expatiating, at what Margiana thought even a tedious. length, on the qualities of his heart and mind, the prowess of his arm, and the graces of his figure, he concluded the sub¬ ject and his letter by saying, that if Lord Widdrington and his daughter were favour¬ able to the scheme, he would immediately send Ethelred up fo London, that he might become acquainted with his cousin, who had not seen him since he was a child; for the perpetual contentions between the Scou auu the Engi^a in the northern part c4 of
of the kingdom, had constantly detained Ethelred in a state of martial preparation on Lord Widdrington's domains, which were situated near the borders. As soon as Margiana returned this letter to her father, he looked in her face with a good-humoured smile. " Well, Margiana," said he, " I know vou accustom yourself to think 6n every subject before you speak of it; nevertheless; as" yott have probably al¬ ready fornied some opinion upon this, without allowing you much more time, I may venture to inquire what answer 1 must return to your uncle, What do you think of his project ?" *' ! think, my dear father, it is a very judicious one, If the union of the family property be the principal object in view." " But what have you to say respecting the union of the two persons in whom it is to be Vested r Ji " Why, my Lord, 1 think it would be a very long journey for Ethelred to take, unless
unless he could be certain it was taken to some purpose. And if the Douglas is in arms, his presence will be -much more useful in Northumberland than in London/* " Northumberland has more warriors to oppose to the Douglas than Ethelred ; and if it should happen that his journey was taken to a good purpose, 1 suppose you will not be the first to detfy that the object which allured him hither merited his endea¬ vours to obtain it. It is above twelve years since you saw him; you were then both children ; so that until you see hitn again, it is impossible you should know whether you can like him or not/' " And it is equally impossible, my dear father, that he should know whether he can like me. He would therefore set out under a double uncertainty; and for a young man, whose time is precious at home, to travel above three hundred miles on purpose tQ fall in love, and perhaps not be able to ac- ctoplish his design at fast, would be a la- Ji c 5 mentable
mcntablc was>te of time and pains; uhereas he is ceitain of being usefully employed where he is." 41 J see," said Lord Widdrington, t( you are disposed to treat this matter lightly; but I imagine it is a recened rule, that a lady should not, at first, be serious on such a subject. However, my brother's proposal certainly merits your consideration. I do not believe his praise of his son is exagger¬ ated, though I am not surprised it makes no immediate impression upon you. You fancy no man can win your heait, because no man has hitherto won it; but Ethelred, I make no doubt, is of a character very different, and infinitely superior to that of most of the idle boys here. It would be unfjair in you to condemn him, unseen and unheard. Let him therefore come, and judge for yourself, for you are well assured I shall never wish to controul your inclinations.*' " Oh! my dearest Lord," cried Margiana, (t can you really think of writing to my uncle
uncle to desire he will send his son up to London for me to look at ? For, in facV what else could a favourable answer amount to ? Young as 1 am, happy under youris, my mother's, and ihe Q.ucen's protection, and at present extremely averse to form any engagement, 1 assure you I have no curiosity to sec this young hero of the north ; but rather, on the contrary, feel an anxious wish that he should continue where he is, slaying, maiming, or bearing into captivity, thc enemies of our liege Lord thc King, instead of coming here to learn the vices that infect this dissolute couit, and endeavouring to make a prisoner of me. • •-' I am glad to find," replied Lord Wid¬ drington, " that you feel interested for Ethelred's preserving his native purity of manners; it augurs well; and a handsome exterior, could you but see him, might do much towards creating a still warmer anxiety in his favour. It is unlucky yotr a e so little disposed to encourage Lis journey. I c 6 thirk
think he must adopt the method of crowned heads, and send you his efHgy. However, as my brother's messenger will be some time in London, and it is not necessary to send any answer until his return, you will have leisure for deliberate reflection. Consult your mother, if you will. She is a sensible woman, and will give you none but the best advice, and what she believes most conducive to your own welfare. After¬ wards, I will have some further conversation with you/* Lord Widdrington now left his daughter; and she, who felt very little interest in what had past, presently dismissed the subject from her thoughts, though she determined to fake the first opportunity of informing her mother of the ofler she had received, and of hearing her opinion with as little prejudice as possible. Such an opportunity soen offered itself. The ne%i maraing. Lady Widdrington, whos© consumptive
consumptive tendency rendered her health extremely fluctuating, seemed better than she had been for several days before, and learned from Margiana, with a strong ex¬ pression of pleasure on her countenance, the subject of Bertram Winburne's letter. She immediately asked her daughter what her own sentiments were ; and received for answer an assurance that whatever Margi- ana's inclinations might be, her judgment should be suspended until she had heard that of her mother, which she would en¬ deavour to establish as the rule of her future conduct. Genevieve was present, for Mar¬ giana had not a thought she wished to con* ceal from her sister. ** I guess from your expressions," said Lady Widdrington, *' that you are not much disposed to concur in your uncle's scheme. I expected you would not. Front witnessing the vices of a few, you have imbibed prejudices against the ina»y-*~pre- judices that, I hope, you will one day find are
nre unfounded. There are various reasons that render it desirable that you should marry, and marry soon. I will not say my life is precarious, for all lives are so; but its very early termination is extremely probable; and when I am gone, ycur situ¬ ation, to say the least of it, will be much exposed. You will urge the Queen's pro¬ tection ; but, in these troublesome times, that cannot be insured to you a single day ? and even if it could, the best protection is that of a husband, supposing him to be a good one. It might, besides, extend to Vour sister, for whom also it would pro¬ bably be needful, since your father's second marriage would be the most likely of all events. t( Respecting Ethelred, there is scarcely a circumstance that does not speak in his favour. Seme allowance must be made for the partiality of a father; however, I have heard persons nowise interested for him. speakof him in termsof high commendation, If Lord Widdrington should leave no son, Etheked
Ethelred must if he lives, succeed to the honours of his ancestors; and even should they never descend to him, thc connexion must still remain respectable. Equality of condition, though not the most material consideration, is always desirable between married persons; for she who marries be¬ neath her own rank in life is rarely five from repentance. But I am not afraid for yon on that score. I rather fear you will be too difficult; for you seem to have formed an unaccountable notion, that happiness/ and matrimony are incompatible. 1 heartily wish Ethelred may be the person destined to undecehe you. At any rate, do not determine without having seen him. It will soon appear whether his character is such as your/s can readily coalesce with; for at his years it is not easy to disguise the natural disposition, did he even attempt to do so. Your father loves you too> tenderly not to be ^ety vigilant when your happiness js at,stake; and you your¬ self
self have penetration enough for yoitf age/' Lady Widdrington seemed exhausted with speaking, yet, animated by her subject, after a pause, she resumed— <k There is an awkwardness, methinks, in consenting to Ethelred's journey, considering it in the light of his coming hither to be approved of. 1 should hope Lord Widdrington would itvoid committing you on that point; but you ought to recollect, that even if Ethelred shovtd com6, it does not necessarily follow that you must be his wife. Admitting the first impression you receive to be in his favour, it will only be reasonable you should take a sufficient time to become ac¬ quainted with hitn> before you etfter into any engagement." #< But when once entered into/* said Margiana, t( ari, dear mother! consider it h for life; and however miserable it may reitttef ine* n& efforts ivstii the k£est hour of
of cate me from the web. A$ to my skill in the discernment of characters, which you was just now pleased to mention, 1 know how very little dependant e I ought to place up¬ on that. I rejoiced, last year, in the fortu¬ nate lot, as 1 thought it, of my friend Agnes Bury, when she married Sir John Lidyard, who appeared to be of the most excellent disposition, artd who, having lived much in the rough courts of Germany, was uncor- rupted by the vice* of our own, and seemed to have brought home wirh him the pim&f manners and the noblest heart. Perhaps his resolutions might at that time be good; but they stood a very short trme proof against the force of bad example, for it soon appeared that his excellent disposition was both ready and willing to receive th£ stamp of every vice. Poor Agnes now suffers for it, and 1 is an instance that a woman may prove very wretched, with a husband who became such under the most prepossessing
prepossessing shew of \irttie an'd honour, If Ethelred furnished a second example oi this nature, I should be reduced to look forward to the death of one of 1 us, as the only means of reco\ering my peace ol mind." * { And so live in the charitable hope of becoming his widow r" said Lady Wid* drington. " But it you fire wise, you will make no rash resolves against him; for," pursued she, faintly smiling, " lhave been told he is good-looking; and should you, after your becoming acquainted, be un¬ der the necessity of changing your sen¬ timents, it will induce a mortifying con¬ fession for the prudent and forecasting Margiana." " Well/* returned Margiana, '* I am no more afraid of him on that score than I should be of a handsome picture of King David, for whose beauty we have the au¬ thority of scripture, But, after all, I will not make myself uneasy ; for if he should come,
rome, perhaps he may not fancy me ; and if he does, I hope I shall always have the fear of his changing before my eyes. Easy as it may sometimes be to win affection, it must in genial be \ery dillicult to retain \(; for men will marry from whim, from pride, from avarice, from fifty other mo- ti\ci?, without feeling a single sentiment of esteem, the only lasting sentiment or caring whether their wives fee! it either," Margiana had here inadvertently struck a tender string. Her mother's eyes glistened, and she turned aside her face, toconceal a tear that broke its boundary. Margiana pretended not to observe it, and proceeded in a strain that sometimes forced from her pensive mother a smile at what she termed her grey-headed caution. However unable to disapprove of Margiana's sentiments, though she wished them less unfavourable to Ethelred, she advised her, in the strongest terms, never to give her hand, either to him or
or to any other man, while her averseness to engage herself lasted.—" Do uot/' said she, " marry entirely for love; but do not marry entirely without it. That would be weakening your chance for happiness in¬ deed. Your want of affection would be a bitter source of regret 1 to a worthy or a sensible husband, and it would induce a Worthless nian or a fool to use yoit ill. If eVer*you foth\ a j&redileetlan' for an estim¬ able lover, marry him without fear, and trust ttf Providence for the rest, assured that you n$ve* can have ? cause tcV reproach yourself; Wws5t : %ntilybtf feel that predilection; and if It'neVCi* arrses in your bosom, cofttSniie^ Margmna Winburne, and live in peace/* •* • " Genevieve's wavering and undecided character manifested itself very strongly during the time this conversation lasted. Wh^ne^er Lady Widdrington spoke, she seemed qnUe convinced by her arguments; bit* appeared equally persuaded by those
her sister urged in reply. Margiana no¬ ticing this, was going to say, that since Genevieve did not labour under the same prejudices with herself, if prejudices they really were, in case Etbcfo-ed should bestow his preference on the handsomest of his cousins, as most young men so circum¬ stanced would do, and pay his addresses to Gene\ie\e, she herself would readily join her interest to promote the family union. She was prevented, however, from saying thisj by the sudden opening of th,e room door, and the abrupt entrance of a tall, handsome lady, whom she had never before seen; but who, familiarly throwing herself on a seat, and addressing lady Widdrington, exclaimed—-" Oh Margaret, I am fatigued to death ! How is my father? I stopt here in my way to his house, for I am just arrived, and was afraid of breaking in upon him before he was prepared------But what is the matter with you, child ? you look as if you was dying too/*
No answer was returned to this intemr- gation. Lady Widdrington, ha\ing turned as pale as death, had fainted away ; and ber daughters were anxiously ^mplo}ed in affording her every assistance in their power.
c .
CHAP,
a——— jm— »»«
CHAP. in. Measures for the VnservHtion of Life and . Proptrty. Whilst Lady Widdrington continued in¬ sensible, the stranger took no share in the efforts made by her daughters to recover her.— li I perceive," she cried, *' Margaret is not altered. She was always subject to fainting-fits, and low spirits, and horrors, and dismals. I wonder time has not cured her of such unaccountable weakness. The sight of me could not surprise her. She must have expected my coming, for Lord Widdrington himself wrote the letter that brought me. I declare she has terrified mc out of my wits." , *' Excuse
*' Kxrusc Ladv Widdrington, Madam,*' said Margiana, observing her mother now shewing signs of returning life.—" She has lono- been in a declining state of health ; and, moreover, I am sure she did not ex¬ pect any stranger this morning. Permit me to shew you into another apartment, until she is able to converse with you." tf Pray, my dear/' said the unknown lady, looking at Margiana over her shoulder, as she threw herself, as if from lassitude, into twenty different attitudes—" pray, my dear, who are you ?*' Margiana coloured from surprise, and perhaps a little from resent merit, at being so familiarly treated bv a stranger.-— i( My name, Madam, is Margiana Winburne." " Is it indeed!" exclaimed the unknown, *—" The hopes of the family, I protest 1 And thi?; pretty-looking. little maiden is your sister, I suppose. Why, Genevieve, hoM up your head, and let me look at vou. I verily think you are a beauty. Hut come, now 1 see your mother is recovering, tell rae
me what I want to know. How is Lord Lothian ? I hope he is not dead yet ?" This question was addressed toGenevicve* who, not being able to answer it, referred the inquirer to her sister. Margiana ac¬ quainted the Inch- that Lord Lot J; inn wns still living, but, as she bad heard that morning at th* palace, bad suffered a paralytic hU \e the day before, from which it was not e> >ccted he coulrl recover t( Who told vou so : " aiked the stranger * f His son, RIada^» "What, Jemnn ? Oh, but Jemmy vcr- baps cnly to?d you ^hat he w! !i*d to b-j ti'uc. 1 mn?t go 3nd *-i:.ke some in ;nirie^ sr»\ Mrlf. \ on av jno^i: ] btticr I sec jM";.ivarct: -o 1 \*i;i ],» \^ ^ ou rr -v, "' d vvill return ;md !i t n e n ii:-!«' c fi at ^. !tli \ou when \ ou aie ruite »\ ^/ ",\ d, G»-, u ! v ', Mar ri ; m ! Ciood b^ e. Oc .' \ iovc ! \ on oiv a \eiv picif s gul, i.-i^/iVi." T !i o la'} v n ow i ni :i ■?, -sva , r \-r - * - > > to
leave the room, when the door opening a second time, Lord Widdrin*>lon entered, followed bv a stranger. Hastily advanci::;^ towards the unknown, without appciu'Lg to percei\e anv other person was present, and cordially saluting her, '* Wchome, tny dearest Alicia," said he, if a thousand times welcome to London. You are seasonally arrned, for 1 fear Lord Iot!.i;.n will hardly linger over another night, iiut he is sen¬ sible just now, and wishes to s-ec \ou. We are this instant coir^e from him, sud there is not a moment to lose. Mv Lord Kothts and I will attend you to his house immedi¬ ately, if you are ready/' . The lady, who had received Lord Wid- drington's salutation as freely as it was bcstovsed, made no ether answer than a hearty shake by the hand; and. nodding once more at the motionless Lady Widdring¬ ton and her daughters, suffered him :o lead her out; the stranger, whom Margiana con¬ cluded
after bowing very profoundlv to the ladies he left. As soon a>Margiana's surprise permitted her to <^cM;. i-.eiolv thro\M*n^ hvr arms ro'Kid t!te reck of the Oent *u\Vi rev--—*' Oh, y.:v i\.ir.*s f * v o iu-r." i -..!t' .O.e. iC ^iiat tan hi; the mranivu ■'>:' thi ■' V\ h?t can so straugclv h-v e -V^: te.I you r ilwt do not answer me now. J,"t ' i'; ''w!'(i"c; \ on to v.j'.v r ( wn t'-anrl" ') and try to iv^-mc jiK'r :l'.'.s iatal i-d-. ^'i-'-'iii^.tou *■!/.?ve fo <:ict!;, bet r-'u!d ^. i'i -\ rtiti';,-te. l'er tiaM'hiors 1 - ' ' " v.. ',!.! ■..,;:.i ;;;..t,:i ; a:u!, t-.»!iit:■* % t ' tiw,» '-M^.-.n. e, ha.lened, her in.o he ! , '-'' , s "" ':"! ;i v hi>it tiuie s!ie beuure moic los. '.- cc\ though she siill continued loo ..\u:. d ;::\o any exy!:inadon of the '.eene t.vt' !ud just p:iVi;*d. i hs who'c of the following day. with the
Queen s permission, Margiana dedicated to her mother, who had another fainting (it in the morning, but seemed considerably re¬ cruited towards night. Lord Widdrington rc\cr for a moment returned home; but as ne wa* known to be at Lord Lothian's, his absence created no further uneasiness to his daughters, than as it proved his want of feeling for his wife. Nothing more wis heard of the unknown lady. Lord Lothian still evistcd, but was now without the least recollection of any person about him. Early on the second morning, Margiana, whose mattrass, by her own desire, had been moved into Lady Widdrington's apart¬ ment, stepping softly up to her mothers bedside, found her in a calm sleep, or only occasionally interrupted by a slight con* vul/ive motion of her hands. She sat down, and had quietly watched over her, near an hour, when Lady Widdrington awoke. She called Mar- iana her best nurse, and told her she
siie felt easy and refreshed—" So easy/* said she, if that I think I can, without fatigue, batisfv the anxiety you and (?eue\ieve must be under respecting the scene of the other day/' Her looks, indeed, proclaimed amend¬ ment, but Mariana hud been too long accustomed to mark the transient hectic ou her cheek to feci flattered by its treacherous glow, On the entrance of Genevieve, Lady Wid¬ drington began her narrative, which, at ea^y intervals, she concluded in the course of the morning. "" Yon already know," said she, < c that during your father's miaoritv he was a ward of the Larl of I othian's, and you have both heard that thai nobleman had a daughter much older than his son, married long ago to Lord Rothes, and settled in Scotland. There is a difference of thirteen vears be- d 3 tweca
l \ \" \ r .)' S \ o' L ,n!rf i *);,,n ' ni;t './^ '"' [ < ' ! >f ^ h( n he \wrswhh : r e !(\;n. p*\ oi » j , • io t u mis trajOt L t\ L iu' wvs < x ^ ^m,^' t u! tJ( t ».«i(/ul t < ".1 01 v! v ' ^T^. II ^ ' v i!l' (*"T«" wie ( (ill < ( ;itr n; s \> ! . r,t -\ . t -: ( > ^ von n<i\e set'i, b>r \on tiv, no do ** 3'ia aicd to karn tint < c.t'\ i ,( t' * - \^ us all so mtuh su^pri e. f< 0\tii^ to \ovx *;*\*r,»lf **hi -•.- ^ * ,y ; when i*u "on va*- a* 1 iif r i td V. It 1 ' • - ton and 'he Lady \!'r a v.ut 1 1 • . , * * v;« *> ^cthcr from t^v «* e*i 5 ^' t wvath I "^ oi re tun stance often -r < re r.t^ r. • cr/ii>c ,( t to* sen blipg ftattrna' u \ 'io.t tl.^ui;.; olher; but if *■" 'od'K ed \cr" da T ;\e:u elleeti n-> t'u" hxv.rt** of these vo'm/, people. A de\^*t: \ and mutual J«t:.uhuient gradually formed between them ; and it had .struck a root ^o deep, that neither of them thought ofhnppi* ness unconnected whh the idea of the other, " At that time, your father's fortune was not expected to prove so large as it has since
sinre \rrai collateral branches. However, I o:d ) othian declared he wa- an\ious o^ly fur t:>* dauj-hter's havpwi^s, ai'd thereiore would not oppose llv/ir union, l^ut it iipoeana this desire £o jjioiv.otc her fetirm I'vle-A no longer than ur-ti' she leec.ved the addresses of a wealthier lover, or tint Lord Lothian then chose to suppose hic.sclt* the ablest jud^e of what would consti¬ tute it. ** Lord Rothe-s being sent on an embassy from the King of Scotland, sr.w and fell in Iove wi t h t he charm i ng Ali cia. & e i ns!an 11 y made the most magnificent proposals to her father, who was too much dazzled by them to consider the promises he had m:'de to Lord Widdrington rw nny obstacles in the way of his avarice and ambition. 1 le passed his word to Lord Rothes that Alicia should be his; and vain were the supplications of his daughter to induce him to charge his purpose. Fearful cf her influencing Lord Rothes to desist from his pursuit, he u 4 never
never suffered an interview between them, but in his presence; and absolutely forbade to your father the entrance of his daughter's apartments, until, through his interest, * procured his being sent > on business i..at concerned the King, into Wales, where he v,as necessarily detained three weeks, Alas! d uvbAg that bhon infervaI, what a thjngc took place ! " No sooner was Lord Widdrington gone than his guardian put every argument ia force, and every art in practice, that could work on the young and flexible mind of hU daughter. He dwelt on the possessions .of Lord Rothes, and his high rank hi Scotland, where, as she would see very few superior to herself, the eyes of the court, voung and beautiful as she was, would rest on her unrivcllcd attractions; whereas, ia j'.n/land, her ehatms would be equalled, ar.d thc .spltndoLT of her rank continually surpassed. Ihit of all the objects of mag- nilicence he set before her, not one ap¬ peared ^o make so mudi impression as the pomp
xnd enter another kingdom attended by the numerous retinue of an ambassador. <*' There is little wonder if such glittering images had their due force on the imagina¬ tion^?" a girl of sixteen, supported as they were by the authority of a father, and the passionate admiration and pleasing person of Lord Rothes. Lord Widdrington's ab¬ sence too, without doubt, lent some assist¬ ance to the cause. In fine, commended for her docility by some, and blamed for her iesity by others, she consented to bestow herself on Lord Kothes, whose business in England being concluded, they immedi¬ ate I v af:cr the celebration of their nuptiais set out for the court of Edinburgh, followed by such a train as probably guarded the voting bride from the intrusion of any remembrance of the lover she had deserted. Of all her own former attendants, however. she took with her only two; a woman, named Bertha, who had been her nurse, and Chaston, a handsome youth, who had r> j lived
lived with har some time in the quality of page. " 1 must now, my dear daughters, direct your attention to a very different scene of liie. " While these events were passing in London, there lived, in a romantic vallev on the banks of Lo?h Lomond, in a small house, which here would be esteemed a better sort of cottage, a widow, with her only child, a girl, on whom, as the ad¬ vantages were denied to her that she might ha\e expected from high-born connexions, all her own cares were bestowed, to supply the deficiency. This widow was the Earl of Lothian's sister; but, in her vouth, un¬ mindful of the r:*nk of her ancestors, and of the splendid alliances her birth entitled her to look forward to, she had married a brave yountr soldier, possessing no higher recommendations than a worthy heart, a gene-ous temper, sincere affection for her, and the advantage of being the person who once had saved her father's life in battle. But
But that father, who loved his merit, and would perhaps not have withheld his daughter's hand as its reward, was dcad> and had left her, with other younger child¬ ren, dependant on his eldest son and suc¬ cessor. -Upon her marriage, she was utterly disclaimed by her brother.—* You have de¬ based yourself/ said he, ' by a connexion with a reptile of obscure parentage, and mean possessions. It is fit you should be humbled to the poverty you have chosen. Subdue your hopes to your prospects. Proportion your desires to the meanness of vour spirit. Your husband carries hh fortune on thc point of his sword; and with that a soldier's wife ought to be con¬ tented.' " Lady Margaret obeyed her kind bro¬ ther's injunctions. She did lower her ex¬ pectations. She limited her wishes to the pleasing of her Creator, and to the ren¬ dering her husband happy, and uuh con¬ tented, " She removed with him to thc situation u G I have
I have described; and after I was born, as long as my gallant father lived, enjoyed a sunshine of the breast, a serenity of mind, that left her no room to regret the loftier scenes of her early days, nor the splendour she had relinquished. But, alas! the sharer of her happiness, he whose affection was the stimulus and the reward of the performance of all her duties, was torn from her when I vas little more than fourteen. He had gone forth with the rest of a numerous clan to wage war against a hostile chief, and w r as brought home mortally wounded, Three days after he died in our arms. ts The gloom that overcast our cottage^ Religion only could cheer; but time could hardly ever be said to alleviate my mother's sorrow. With her own relations she had not had intercourse for many years. Pier eldest brother resided almost constantly in England, where he had married a wealthy heiress. The younger ones were dispersed in various parts of the kingdom, and hei* sisters had all formed high alliances, Her child
child alone was left her; and now her only delight, unconnected with a better world, was to impart to her the instructions she had herself received, when brought up as a dauahier of one of the first families in Scotland. Our days glided on iu quiet tranquillity, if not in happiness; a few small inclosures around the house, extend¬ ing; on one side to the feet of the moun- tains, on the other to the margin of the like, being the whole of my father's humble patrimony that my mother still retained in her own hands. The pasturage sufficed for a large flock of sheep, and a herd of small Scottish cattle. Thc tillage was managed b\ two brothers of the name of Kendrew; one of whom, my dear children, is well Xno\tn to } ou both, being no other than the iaithful old servant who has lived with me, j.nd continued his attachment ever since. These men, at that time in the meridian of life, were the sons of an aged woman, our only female servant, who had nursed my fa¬ ther; and the elder, be who is now here, had been
been his foster-brother. With him they had always borne arms, and after the last fatal action, wherein he had received his death's wound, they, after fighting by his side, were the humble friends who had borne him from the field of blood, and brought him to his home. When he died, they took a solemn oath upon their Prices, never to desert his widow and his child, so long as their services might be accepted—and never was engagement entered into by man no re strictly, more religiously fulfilled. When the chief of their clan went to war, one of them performed his martial duties, while the other continued with us, to attend to niv mother's,little property ; and the next time their leader summoned them to arms, the brothers reversed their occupation, so equally were they attached to us. *' Five vears had thus passed; my mo¬ ther's anguish had in some degree subsided into tender melancholy ; and I vns un¬ disturbed by a wish to know moie t^an I already did of a world I believed mvself Jesiined
destined never to mix with; when one summer's evening, my mother and I had strayed so long on the beautiful banks of Loch Lomond, that she felt fatigued, and threw herself on the grass, on a little shaded knoll that commanded a \iew of the wide expanse of water before us, the gentle rippling of which was scarcely heard to murmur. She had given me some instruc¬ tions in botany, and I was amusing myself bv iratheilng aquatic plants on the border of the ]u\.e, when I was interrupted by a horsenvui m an linghbh garb, who, riding up to mc, inquired if he was near the coJta^e in Kosedalc, inhabited by Lady Margaret Stiaihalcrue, and if I knew whe¬ ther that Lady was then actually there ? \S h e i s m y i n o t h e r/ said I. * Th a t is h er w horn 5 ou see sitting \onder, beneath those trees. Our cottaire is hard by.*—The man looked at me very earnestly, with an express Imi, I thought, of fender pity on his counterman ,\ and then, dismounting from his ho walked towards my mother, whom he . COSt'.'",
costed with a respectful gesture, at the same time presenting her with a letter. '* On perceiving from whom it came, she changed colour; and immediately di¬ recting the stranger to the house, desired he would refresh himself after his jour¬ ney* " As soon as he was gone, she read her letter through. A violent trembling seized her; and calling me to her, she prest me in her arms, and burst into a flood of tears. ' Oh, my child/ she exclaimed, f I fee], I feel 1 ought to lose yon!' She put the letter into my hands. I can repeat every word it contained, It made me tremble a-- -much as herself.
* I.ADV MAKGAKET, ' Though it h so long since we last parted, I have not forgotten that ycu are my sVer; znd I moreover consider, fhat time has in some measure espiatcd the
msulf you put upon our noble house, when vou connected yourself with a peasant. But he is gone, and 1 understand you nre left in poor circumstances, with a daughter. ' As she has committed no thence, I am willing, for her -:uc, to overlook the past, and procure for hi:i- the same advantages .she would have been entitled to, if nobly born. My own daughter 1 am just now on the point of losing, owing to her marriage with the P.arl of Kothes; aud I make you the offer of vour daughter suppling her place to Lady Lothian and my&elf. I think yon will not consult her true interest so little, as to hesitate whether you shall, de¬ prive yourself of her, for the promotion of hei o-vn welfare; or, by rejecting my pro- pu , uiUi.w h<v it: the obscurity from w- ■■- I shail make no future attempt to » , : \\-* expiration of one year, yoa \-\. \ :..* 'M.( her again with you, or ^he ■i . -.'j !.: iciur . to you, I wiil make no op* 'The
* The bearer of f ! .\ is a (ni^^ 'ffant. ^n whom vou r.i.n ** ,fVb* foi'lluo hcr» and he wiU dcfir-s [*.< r e\ ■■^•)ro, i J^i'.rr. * i :>t.<\ irjJls l.t u*,*on Yo f! i" fVif^tir* p^d btoihi-r, I oii".\ K ,*
" Terrified at the idea of leaving my motner. and undertaking finch, a journey ur.de i the tare of a stranger, and to meet only strargors at the do&e of it, 1 wrpt }>i?terly, and besought fhe would not drive iue from her and from ccrta ; :i contentment, f^r the. precarious chance of di^iant advan¬ tage. But my mother, conceal - ',™ her own rtduc<anc», the better to overcome mine, told me she could not answer it to her own conscience, were she to oppose this fiat emotion of goodwill that had ever dawned in Lord Lothian's breast towards* me. She said it would be madness to reject such a profiler, under the certainty of its never being repeated ; and used many other argu¬ ments
ments to reccnrile me to t\\e thoughts of parting from her wifhout clcfry, ^Soi one of them, howe\er, had h:i!f so much force a -the recollection that I should have it in v,v power to rejoin herat>:ibi at the end of r\ ■ \car; and i femcied n\y ! cpj^inets would ho con)|dcte if. durin» the interval, f coul I :.o Tar obtain Lord Lothian's g"<»d grate* aw to procure his entire forgiveness of my mother, and an invitation for her also to come into England. " Without considering the probable con- «rquences of ?uch a step, I even urged her to let us then depart together, tmce she deemed it expedient I should go at all; but, however her inclination might prompt her not to los>e sight of me, her prudence overcame every other consi.leration, and the repp-son ted the danger there would be of offending Lord Lothian* and thereby obscuring the prospect that now began to open to my ad\antage. But no less averse than myself to the idea of my being con¬ fided to the sole care of a person who v.a$ utterly
utterly unknown to us, she determined that the elder Kendrew should not only accom* pany me to London, but even remain there as my attendant, at least for the first twelve¬ month, which might be called my proba¬ tionary year. tf As soon as I found my mother was re¬ solute to pursue this chance of insuring Lord Lothian's protection for mc, and per¬ haps of recovering his favour for herself, I endeavoured lo conceal, if I could not con¬ quer, thc pain I felt, and not encreasc her sorrow by unavailing expressions of my own, Honest Kendrew was proud of his commission, and assured my mother that the honour of being thought worthy of such a trust was, to his feelings, more than an adequate reward for the services of his whole life. " What little preparations I needed were soon complete. My wardrobe was very simple and very scanty; but the farewells that passed between my mother and myself pn the morning of my departure would have lasted
lasted long indeed, had not she, with a fortitude she never allowed to forsake her, peremptorily put a stop to them ;—yet, with tears and a fervent embrace, she blessed me, and bade me, when I had been a few weeks in my uncle's house, write a letter to her, v/nkh I might scud by Ken- drew, who should bring me back her answer. —At length, half blind with weeping, I suffered her to tear herself from me; and Kcndrew having litted me on my horse, I be°an mv journey with him and Lord Lothian's domestic; and soon lost sight of that peaceable, paternal spot, 1 was doomed never again to behold. " I know scry little of what passed from that time until the day of our reaching London. Absorbed in the tender recol¬ lection of the parent I had left, I was in¬ sensible to the objects we passed; and no¬ thing gave me pleasure but the friendly voice of Kcndrew, who, while he shewed the utmost sensibility and compassion for iny feelings, strove to raise me into the cheerfulness
cheerfulness of hope, by dwelling on the satisfaction my mother would enjoy, when he returned with an account of my uncle*s kindness, am! my own restored serenity of mind. The behaviour of my other com- pav;on \wis also constantly rc-pectfuK and even kind. So that, though 1 still continued decpK to re s rot the society and the scenes I had (juitled, mv fears gradually subsided, and I no longer trembled at the thought;-, of living in a strange land. '•' it was on the c\eninr, of the lourtc« ? nth day from ou? setting out that vc arrived in london. Notwithstanding all the cr.- courasremeut given tne by .my icitow- travellors, and my own cudcin orrs to summon as n>i:(h cuira^-e as possible, I yet shrunk a? the moment arp;*o:tcIied that was to bring me into my uncle's presence. Half dei.d with ('car, I alighted at hi' door, from whence I was rr.ther supported than conducted into an inner room, where I con¬ tinued alone some minuteslelorc I received an order to attend Lord Lothian in another apartment.
M \UOIA\A apartment. Con^/ious of hardly an\ other fcciing than teiror, I followed thcscr\iu^- man v*ho came for me, wishing I could have turned mv stop the contrary way,aud traced baek mv tedio.i, iournty out of Scotland. IKjh- au.viou'ib, d:-: I *hcn thi:ik of our cot- t:t ;e i;i. tl.e b..i \s of l.och Lor.^-nd ! ,( i;ut [>resvn;' ; my ti:r.id:ty w^'-i dispcl- h d, lord I othi.it:, ^>hose strong rtsem- bbnre to i^y ir<:Tiu.r ir.M.mtly v,o:i him a plarc in my heart, fame foiward to meet me wilh cxprt^ions cf K*nd:ioss ; a.id catl¬ ing mc Ids dear niece, led me to where his Ladv was sitting, who also vouchsafed me a \cr\ obliging reception. They both .spoke rentlv to rae ; uivJ, softened bv a treatment so ditlerent from what I had expected, and overpowered by a thousand nameless sensa¬ tions, fatigued too, perhaps, with having travelled so far, I sunk on the floor in a state of insensibility. " Lady Kothes very lately observed I had before been subject to fainting fits. On recovering my recollection, I beheld her, f *v
for the first time, standing beside ber mother, who was assisting a female servant to restore me. Never having seen any thing half so lovely till then, I was asto¬ nished at her beauty. But my admiration stopt at her person. I must confess she never gave mc cause to extend it to the qualities of her heart, though she discovered talents worthy of a better disposition. £t Lord Lothian, when I next saw him, behaved to me with great tenderness. He was pleased to say my appearance imich excelled what he had looked for, though he had been taught to expect an interesting countenance ; and the fondness I presently conceived for his little boy, whom both he and Lady Lothian passionately loved, a fondness which the child soon returned, contributed, as I then thought, to secure me the favour of them both. " But of Lady Alicia's good graces I had no share, though her mind was too much occupied with the approaching change in; her situation, the thoughts of the lover she regretted,
regretted, the future glories of her intro¬ duction at the eourt of Edinburgh, and the actual enjoyment of daily seeing the Scot~ tish ambassador's train, to think much about me at all, " Once, and only once, her heart seemed to open towards me; but it was rather owing to a selfish desire of unburthening herself of her own painful sensations, than from the generous confidence of friend¬ ship. fe Going one evening into her room, I found her bathed in tenia; and, little sus¬ pecting then how many she would after¬ wards occasion me to shed, I wept to see her weep, yet exhorted her to support her spirits ; berause> though she must naturally, as I foolishly fancied, be hurt at leaving her father's house, yet Lord Rothes bore so good a character that she could not be otherwise ttun happy with him. To mv amazement, she told mc her grief pro¬ ceeded from the fear of never seeing Lord Widdrington more. I simply a>ked her, vou i. c v>ho
who LordWiddrington was?—-'Oh/ she replied, passionately clasping her hands, * the dearest of human beings, the most charming of men ! He is more valuable to me than life. We ha\e long loved each other; vet my father tears me from him, to bestow me on Lord Rothes, whom a few months ago I did not know to be in existence/ " She then, though not without frequent¬ ly interrupting herself, to break forth into violent exclamations, gave me the history of her own and Lord Widdrington's attach¬ ment, with so many lavish encomiums on her lover, that, whilst I pitied her for being forcibly parted from him, 1 could not but blame her for consenting to marry his rival. I even exhorted her, late as it was, to break off the engagement, which I thought it was very wicked to fulfil, while her heart was so strongly bound to another; but 1 perceived, that not only principle but even affection in her was subordinate to vanity. As 1 urged the cause of Lord Widdrington, she reverted
reverted to Lord Rothes; and weary at length of talking to a person with whom vehemence held the place of reason, and in whose bosom pride triumphed over a blame¬ less love, I suffered her to speak on without interruption or reply. et When she observed my silence, a sullen lit ensued; and I know not how long that might have lasted, had not Iady Lothian entered, holding a siml! easket in her hand. ' More presents/ exclaimed she, • for my Lady Ambassadress! Why, Alicia, you will be covered over with jewels !* So saving, she displayed the precious treasure she had brought; and as some costlv trinkets <rlit- tered in the eyes of the vain girl, I per¬ ceived the tears that still lingered in them gradually disperse, and her face brighten into a smile. She tried them on. The foolish mother praised lev beauty, which indeed no decorations could encrease, and the whiteness of her arms, set oft' by the brUliant bracelets that were clasped around them. In a few minutes Lord Rothes came
in. She greeted him courteously and kindly; and I left them, my head and heart filled with the image of the amiable and wronged voung man whose loss she had just been lamenting, Such was the origin of a senti¬ ment which will never leave me but with my latent breath. " Lady Alicia and I never had a private conversation subsequent to this, « About a week after my arrival in London, her nuptials were celebrated with great splendour, and she set out with Lord Kothes forScotland, in the manner I before mentioned. How little resemblance did the leave she took of her parents bear to a scene that was still fresh in my recollection! Intoxicated with the vanity of the moment, with the adulation of her bridegroom, who looked on her as something too lovely for * mortal, and with the caparisons of the fine train of horses that were parading in the street, she parted from both Lord and Lady Lothian as if they had been ordinary acquaintances; and her farewell to me was
was no less extraordinary.—*' Adieu, cousin* Margaret/ said she, f fair inheritrix of all my cast jewels and fine old robes! Put them on becoming^ and who knows but your fortune is made V " These were the last words I heard from. Lady Rothes, until her unlooked-for, un~ wished-for appearance the day before yes¬ terday. " After her departure, the kindness 1 had hitherto received from her father and mo¬ ther was redoubled, particularly from the former. Appearing to place some connV dence in me, he frequently talked of Lord Widdrington, and lamented the strong rea¬ sons that had forced him to plunge a dagger into his heart; while he spoke of him in the highest terms of praise, and always con* eluded with an earnest wish that some woman as amiable as his daughter might, by engag¬ ing his affections anew, induce him to for¬ get her loss. w These expressions sunk deep into my memory, and fluttered my imagination, as k 3 he
he intended they should. When Lord Wid- drington returned ont of Wales, I longed, yet trembled to behold him; and why should I deny that his first appearance confirmed every sentiment I had been predisposed to indulge in his favour ? As soon as he found Alicia was gone, and lost to htm for ever, he raved with all the violence of a young and disappointed lover, and threatened lord Lothian with the anger of the King, to whom he meant to represent his baseness and breach of promise. The wily noble heard him calmly, and calling*me into the room, bade me tell LordWiddrington with how much willingness his daughter had dis¬ posed of her hand. He then left us together. '* Your father could not continue bis vehemence and menaces to me, but by degrees he softened into complaint, and f wept as he described his sufferings. He came the next day; Lord Lothian again left us alone, and the scene was renewed. Soon after he inquired of me the particulars of Alicia's behaviour. 1 had no desire to disguise
disguise the truth, for indeed I thought it likely to prove the most sovereign remedy for his wounded mind; and on acquainting him with it, I beheld the indignation of honest pride succeed to the regret of pas¬ sion, lie paused some minutes. At length •—* Oh,' said he, f had she possessed your feeling heart,* for he saw I was very much agitated, * how different her conduct would have been! But with personal charms equal to hcr's, you have a mind beyond compari¬ son superior.' u TmVartless, but earnest praise vibrated to my soul. I blushc-l; I was ready to sink. Lord Widdrington looked intently at me. ' By Heavens!' he exclaimed, in a hurried voice, * I will think of her no longer* •—he fell at my feet™ f if you will deign to accept of an outcast/ " I was speechless, Surprise, and a half- formed attachment, overpowered me. He talked on, but I knew not what he said.. AH I recollect is, that my uncle entering the room, LordWiddrington told him he might f 4 yet
yet make him amends for the x :ry he had clone him. * Oive me/ said he, ' your interest with vour niece, and I will ru> longer remember that you forfeited your honour to me in the affair of )our daughter/ ' J have no authority over my niece/ replied f,ord Lothian. ' She depends on Jier mother. Apply for her consent, if you can obtain that of Margaret hrrself; and Ton shall have niv wishes for vour success--• all I am warranted to bcMow/ tc It is needless to be verv minute in this part of my story, and I am weary of talking Two dd\s after, Lord Widdrington, insti¬ gated, alas 1 by resentment against Lady Rothes, and transient passion for myself, speeded into Scotland, where, as it may be supposed, he easily obtained my dear mother's concurrence with his desires, and a promise from her that she would come and reside with us in England as soon as we were married. tf A short time after his return the cere¬ mony
mony was performed that bound, or should have bound, him to a woman he soon ceased to love. Yet, blessed for awhile in his affection, and the society of my venerable parent, who, having given up her cottage to the younger Kendrew, lived entir^y with us, I ^as happy, until a fatal journey LordWiddrington made into Scotland,when he renewed his acquaintance with the be¬ witching Lady Rothes, robbed me of his heart for ever/ 7 Lady Widdrington here paused, and con- vuKhcly sobbed. Her daughters would ha\e spoken comfort to her.—" It is too late," said she^ fl " to taik of comfort. 1 am djing of a broken heart, and am past the reach of consolation here. But I have yet a few words to add to my narrative. (t I had not been long carried when an accident discovered to me that I was under much less obligation to Lord Lothian than I had belie\cd. Passing one day by an open door ; I heard Kendrew in a passion, tittcr- ej ■* ing
ing some very disrespectful expressions whieh I fopnd k& applied to my uncle. I seyit forhinij a^d chided him very seriously fof wliat he had said; reminding him, tint whatever reasons he himself might have individually for disl&ing Lord Lothian, he ought nok ^ince he professed attachment to me, tp#peju> ill of one whose kindness had proved the means of establishing me so happily, ' And happy may you lorg be, dearest Lady !' said he—' but your wel¬ fare was the last thing that mean carle e\er thought of. It was his own safety hfc hoped to secure when he sent for you out of Scot¬ land, or he would not have spent a bawbee for your journey into England.* " I told Kendrew he raved, and asked him what possible connexion could exist between my uncle's security and my com¬ ing to London ? Upon which he shook his head so significantly that I urged him to explain his meaning. He hesitated for some time, but at length, and I believe it was: no slight gratification to himself, he acquainted 3 me
me with particulars that he. had learned from the person who had been commis¬ sioned by Lord L w ;hian to conduct me from Scotland. " It seems that when Lord Widdrington found himself obliged, by the order of King Edward, to leave his fair mistress to the solicitations of his rival, and go into Wales, he, though he. did not suspect that order had been instigated by his guardian, vowed, in the most vehement terms, that if any advantage was taken of his absence to further the suit of Lord Rothes, in open breach of the contract entered into with himself, his resentment should know no bounds; and he would not only state the whole affair to the King, from whose justice he might expect the most ample redress, but would also never cease to demana the royal permission to avenge his injuries with the point of his own sword. " Lord Lothian was too well acquainted with the impetuous disposition of his ward to flatter •himself that his conduct, in case r.Q of
of provocation, would fall short of his as¬ surances; and he looked forward with the most decided aversion to the probable chance of either being forced to a pecu- niary indemnification, or of hazarding the safety of his own person. " It occurred to him ? that if the tide of Xord Widdrington's affections could be turned, his wealth and his life, the two dearest considerations upon earth to him, would both be secure. But Lord Widdring - ton had always shewn himself insensible to the attractions of every lady about the court, those of Alicia alone excepted. If, there¬ fore, any object could engage his attention, it must be one that had at least the charm of novelty to recommend it. s( It so happened, that a distant kinsman of Lord Lothian's had formerly become acquainted with my father, from their hav¬ ing been engaged on the same side in a quatrel that produced several engagements between two. adverse clans; and this man had more than once repeated to Lord, Lothian
heard a partial father bestow on his only child, with the benevolent intention of inspiring the chief of his house with a de¬ sire of befriending his widowed sister and orphan niece, " Lord Lothian, however, had hitherto disappointed his hopes, if hopes he had, by utterly disregarding his communication. But it now revived in his memory, while he founded upon it a scheme for his own advantage. It was more than probable that the eulogiuins he had heard were exaggerations far beyond the truth; but of that a trusty messenger would be able to judge. If they were found to be so, his niece would be no sufierer from remaining in that obscurity to which she had been accustomed; and if her exterior really corresponded with the accounts he had received, it might be worth while to try its effect on the heated injnd of a young man mad with disappointment, and likely enough to make a hasty second choice,
choice, while his resentment wasin full force against the faithless mistress who had forsa¬ ken him. Besides, Lord Lothian considered, that whatever the event might prove, he should, to a certainty, secure himself the credit of a good action, in rase his niece did come: but if she was not likely to answer the purpose so desirable to him, he deter¬ mined not to put himself to the expence and trouble of her journey. His messenger therefore -was a person above the level of a common domestic, one to whom he could venture to entrust the nature of his plan, and to who^n he gave his positive command not to reveal from whence he came, and still less to deliver his letter to my mother^ if he found me only an ordinary figure, but to invent some excuse for his visit to our cottage, and leave me where I was. fi The man, having a worthy heart and a ^ood temper, undertook the commission not only with readiness but pleasure ; and declared to Kendrew he felt the liveliest satisfaction on discovering, at the first glance,
glance, that he might safely bring me tu England, without fear of his Lord's re¬ proaches. For though jhe did not suppose it likely that my uncle's scheme should succeed in its fullest extent, he rejoiced that my prospects in life would be, as he esteemed it, so much amended; and that, from whatever motive, Lord Lothian would at length be induced to do justice to such near relations. " On his return, he said, he received nr praise for thc manner in which he had ecitted the part assigned him; but chanc afterwards to fall into disgrace with Lord I othian for some tii\ial offence, he re- \c-nged himself by revealing the whole of t.iis contii\ imce to the worthy Kendrew wlio.se downright honesty, and hatred c r meanness and deceit, made him look ui, the author of it as an object of resentment and contempt. " I could not he)p, in a great degree, sharing these sentiments. Nevertheless^ I desired my faithful friend not to extend his communication
communication beyond myself, and parti¬ cularly gave him a charge to withhold it from my mother^ in whose breast it would have destroyed a pleasing illusion, without there being a chance of its answering any possible good end. " I have now, my dear children, little more to say. The two first years of my marriage were spent in almost perfect hap*- pi ness. After you, my dear Margiana, was born, your father's fondness for you made me look forward to a continuance of it, and I hoped and believed he would become a domestic man, as well as a fond husband. " His fatal journey into Scotland blighted this charming prospect!—But that is a sub¬ ject on which I have vowed a silence no human provocation shall induce me to break. " Before his return; I had the misfortune to lose my beloved mother, who died hap^ p% for herself, for she did not see that reverse of my fate which shortly after destroyed my peace of mind. Since then, the
the hopes held forth by religion, and the duty and affection of my amiable daughters, have been my only sources of comfort—and rich ones they have proved." Long as Lady Widdrington's narrative had been for one in so weak a state, it did not seem to have produced any ill effects. Margiana and Genevieve, to whom the re¬ lation thev had heard rendered her more dear than ever, watched over her with un¬ remitting attention ; and on the evening of the ensuing day she appeared so composed that they did not fear disturbing her by naming the death of Lord Lothian, who had given her so little cause to hold him in esteem. Lord Widdrington still continued absent. He was left, by a singular reverse of du ties, guardian to the young Earb jointly with Lord Rothes; and dedicated all his time and attention to the obsequies of the deceased, and the fascinations of his still too lovely daughter i
daughter; who, in a shorter time than de¬ cency strictly warranted, appeared abroad, and seemed very desirous to gain frequent admission to Lady Widdrington. But Ken¬ drew, on this occasion, assuming the office of her guard, sturdily denied all entrance to the intruder; though, at the request of Margiana, who knew her mothers wishes, his refusals were civil, and account" ed for by the pleaded indisposition of his Lady. Thcm§h £he invalid, however, was spared the mortification of seeing her ancient rival, .she was harassed by her attempts at ob¬ trusion, and deeply grieved by the con¬ sciousness she forbore to utter, of iier fa¬ miliar intercourse with Lord Widdrington. Her late amendment of health pi oved very transient. The worst symptoms of her complaint soon recurred, and another week made considerable ravages in her exhausted constitution. Her nights became more rest¬ less than ever, her appetite totally forsook her.
her, and her daughters trembled for bet safety. Margiani forbore all attendance at court, v*h;ch was thc only place where she bad a chance of seeing her father; and she there¬ fore wrote to him, to apprize him of the extreme danger her mother was in, and to entreat he would a fiord her the consolation ef a visit. While she anxiously expected his reply, if not his presence, she received from one of her young companions, in "the service erf the Q,uecn, some very unwelcome infor¬ mation. Lady Rothes, she was told, had peremptorily refused to revisit Scotland, after her father's affairs were settled, though it was the earnest wish of her Lord to re¬ turn to llothes Castle, and they bad left their only son in Edinburgh. In addition to this, Margiana, with accumulated vexa¬ tion, heard that, through the undisguised interest of her father, Lady Eothes bad been
been appointed to a place about the court, which would necessarily detain her in England* ff Let us, however, keep this from i^y mother/' said she to Genevieve,—But some officious informer had already rendered her cautlort vain. The next morning Kendrew came to her with a sorrowful aspect, holding a paper in his hand.—" Alas, Lady/' said he, " my Lord has written, but he is not come." He gave her the paper, and she read these words:—
" MY BEAR MARGIANA,. " I am very sorry to hear your mother is so ill You do perfectly right to pay her every attention. Lord Lothian's afTairs leave me hardly master of an hour of my time; but I will be with you. this evening without fail, when I hope to find
her better. You and Genevieve have my blessing. W/' This was welcome intelligence to Lady Widdrington, and she seemed to be revived for some hours by the expectation of see¬ ing her husband. But thc evening came, and he did not appear. As night ap¬ proached, she seemed nearly worn out by disappointed hope, and was observed to listen to every sound, though she did not express her thoughts. At nine o'clock, Kendrew brought to Margiana another note from her father. These were its contents;
u I iiavk been unavoidably detained till now, my dearest girl; and for my wife's sake, I will not disturb her at this late hour. But by daybreak to-morrow, icll her she may rely on seeing your affec¬ tionate father, Widdrington/*
<f Does
( < Boca he call me his wife?" said Ladv Widdrington, when Margiana had read these few lines aloud. " It is a name of tender¬ ness; bless him for beuowing it! 1 pray Heaven," added she, afj(er a pause, " 1 may live till daybreak!' 1 f She scon after fell into a disturbed slum¬ ber; and her daughters tool; it in turns to watch beside her during the night, though neither of them, when laid down, could sleep for a moment. Kendrew sat on the floor* on the outside of the apartment, the tears from time to time chasing each other down his rugged cheeks, according to the accounts he received from the Countess's women. Sometimes he was told she had waked, and had asked for cooling drink. Sometimes she lay still and motionless. At others, her recollection failed, and she rambled in her talk; once saying—" Cruel Alicia 1 who but myself would have con¬ sented to such a------" But most frequently she inquired if the dawn had yet appeared ? A little
A little after four o'clock, she fainted, Margiana, while she supported her in her arms, bade Genevieve order Kendrew to hasten for his Lord. He was gone in an instant:; and Lady Widdrington reviving, Margiana yet had hopes her father might arrive before it was too late. Yet Kendrew had been gone half an hour, when the morning broke, and Lord Wid¬ drington was not come. The surferer press¬ ed the hands of Margiana and of Gene¬ vieve.— 4 Blebs you, my dearest children,** said she, in a very low voice. " Always love and respect your father; it will be a comfort to yourselves. Remember my advice, Margiana: while your averseness to marriage subsists, remain as you are. Genevieve, Lady Rothes seemed partial to you : endeavour to improve her partiality. Recollect it is the last counsel 1 shall ever give you." Then, raising herself up, Ladv Widdring¬ ton
ton fixed her dying eyes intently on a picture of her mother, that hung near her bedside. She gazed on it a few seconds, without speaking; and bowing her head towards it, at last distinctly said— u 1 am coming !" She then sunk on her pillows, smiled on Margiana, and tried to speak; but her voice was gone for ever ! A quarter of an hour after, Lord Wid¬ drington arrived. Kendrew hurried him into the apartment. He saw the once lovely form of his wife stretched in death on the bed ; and directing his eyes further, beheld Margiana leaning her head against the side of the room, in mute affliction. Genevieve was kneeling, drowned in tears. He advanced; and taking a hand of the corpse, half sobbed with anguish and re¬ morse, " Oh that I had come sooner !'* he cried. « Oh
u Oh that you had, n»y Lord!" repeated Margiana. Kendrew entered; and respectfully lay¬ ing hold of Margiana, he led her from the scene of sorrow; only saying to Genevieve as he passed her, " Be of good comfort; Lady, my Lord will take care of you.'*
VOL* U
»
CHAP.
The Wheel of Fortune— »Hqw to insure Repentance* Lokd Widdrington, deeply affected, now for several days confined himself entirely to his own house; and nothing could exceed the tenderness of his behaviour towards his daughters. He seemed labouring under the reproaches of his own conscience; and bore with the half respectful, half surly manners of Kendrew, as if he thought it a duty to submit to what he had deserved, and consi¬ dered his patience as some degree of ex¬ piation of his offence*'
On
r On the different minds of Margiana m& Genevieve, sorrow h&& itft ehaar&ctei?is€ie et* ffcetef Genevieve wept bitteriy, declared she could never know happiness more, and was comforted; while Mafrgiana's angular was concentrated within her own bosom, and outwardiymanifesteditseif no otherwise than by her profound silence and altered looks. The faithful Kendrew was a.very sincere mourner. Transferring the whole force of his hereditary attachment to the child and grandchild of the persons he had so long ioved and served, he became as strongly devoted to Margiana as he had been to them. But he not only affected to owttook Gene¬ vieve, he even betrayed a dMike towards her, which appeared unaccountable, and which he never would assign any reason for. The name of Lady Rothes was no longer mentioned in this house of moitfning. #r * ^ degrees,
degrees/however, Lord Widdrington's ab¬ sences, at times when it was known his duty did rjiot require his attendance on the King, gave Margiana room .to fear that he Xoo pften ftequented the abode of the young %orA Lothian, with whom Lord and Lady Rothes, for the present, resided. Lady Widdrington had been dead near three weeks, when Margiana was informed by her father, that the messenger who had lately come from his brother Bertram was preparing to depart, and that it would be proper to return hy him an answer to the letter he had brought. Margiana had no difficulty in determining what that answer should be. Recalling to mind her mother's last advice, she felt less disposed than ever to favour the ad¬ dresses of any suitor; and Lord Widdring¬ ton loved her too sincerely to put the least force upon her inclination, or even to use persuasions, that he believed would have all the
the weight of a command. When she told him, therefore, how extremely averse she was from giving any encouragement to her uncle's overture, and besought him to spare her the distress she must suffer, if Ethelred Winburne came tp London avowedly oa w her account, he readily agreed to put a decided negative, at least for the present, on the aifair, though he couched the refusal in such terms as could give no wound to the feelings either of his brother or his nephew. He represented the recent loss Margiana had sustained as a sufficient reason for her wishing to decline every immediate address ,* and to prevent her actual averse-^ ness from giving any mortification, he par¬ ticularly dwelt on her steady rejection of the young Earl of Lothian, though Lord Widdrington meant not, he said, to com-- pare a giddy and unprincipled youth with- Ethelred Winburne, of whom report, from. every quarter, spoke so highly. With this just tribute to his nephew's r ^ fame
lame he concluded his letter, and the messenger set oiF with it for Widdrington Tower. Bu* in as short a time as he could well travel tMther and return, he was again in London, and brought to LordWiddrington a second dispatch, which gave him serious uneasiness, or rather only added to the deep concern fee already fel* on the King's ajccOT&t fiis brother acquainied him, that the dis¬ contents in tb& north had now acquired Mich f©ree, and the people were so *5pe for $ev€»lt, that nothing but the wnt of the Bake oT ^Lancaster's preaenee prevented ^iek rising into ©pen rebellion, fhe Earle ef Korthumbarknd and Westmoreland, he ^id, fearlessly proisssed their design of ^warning his pj«eten«i©ns, whatever they might be; ama* t^e tide ©f atren^th of their respective counties must unavoidably flow wWi them. Henry, he added, was knbwn to
t to %h Ut ^aftt%, *ro^t HvhWdfc It Was con¬ jectured he meant to take *he &s*t 6fp6r= tunity of embarking for England, under the I&fflrrfbfe ptAdtice of elaiming nts lawful jjatfimtJfty. ' Sttt hoWeVer that niight^erVe as his ostensible ¥ea%d% theYfe cotlld t^e IftO doubt whrn, afte^ his arrival, he ihoiitd become conscious oT Ms dwn stto^h, and Richard's Want 6f p&tftt, that his VW$ would be directed to -a 'rriuefc Wgher aim. Reports Were already ^£1reaSin£ of a <&- a^fectibh iti frela^fA, that *r%arenea t6 as¬ sume a very Formidable appearance; and sh6uld any tumult break forth in that quarter, it wotild unquestionably prove as favourable to the 0oke of L^ahcfaEster as fatal to the King. f?rom all th^e priemte^ Bertram drew his conclusion, that his brother v/oufd act more wisely to join the popular cause as sorjn as the Duke came OVef, than, by piquing himself on a barren loyalty, en¬ danger his ovVn Welfare, and that df all his : 4 house^
house, by fruitless endeavours to prop & sinking sovereign. He slightly mentioned the family treaty he had lately attempted to set on foot, and' was so far from appearing to resent the determination of his niece, that he ap¬ plauded in her that respect for her mother's memory which forbade her turning her thoughts towards any other subject. At some future period, he said, the young people might probably meet; and it would be time enough thm, in case they approved of each other, to talk of ap union between them. In the meanwhile, it was likely that work enough would be cut out for Ethelred, who was disposed to take as warm an interest in behalf of Henry of Lancaster as any other kinsman of the house of Percy. Lord Widdrington had but too much reason to believe that his brother's account o£ the national ferment was not exagger¬ ated ;
ated; and a few days after it became pub¬ licly known that an insurrection was raging in Ireland. Yet the infatuated Richard was not raised from his supineness until the news arrived that the Earl of March had been slain there in a skirmish. The death of the heir presumptive of his crown effectually removed the King's lethargy; but, always ill-judging in hi* measures, even when he meant to act for the best, he resolved on the most fatal step he could have taken, and declared his design of going over to Ireland in person to revenge the murder of his cousin. Vain were the attempts made by Lord Widdrington, and by all the other nobles attached to him, to dissuade Richard from a conduct so big with ruin to himself. He not only persisted to depart, but took with him by far the greater number of his ad¬ herents, thereby leaving his kingdom nearly f 5 defenceless
^efe^elass against the expected return of the Duke of Lancaster. He named his uncle, the Duke of York, his regent; but that nobleman's close alli¬ ance with Henry rendered it improbable he should raise any very formidable opposition to his pretensions; so that of all the chiefs left in England, lord Widdrington might almost be deemed the only one steadily at* tached to the royal cause. The fatal consequences of Bichard's de¬ parture to himself are well known. His ambitious and provoked enemy landed at Ravenspur, in Yorkshire, with a small train, which, by the junction of the Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland, soon swelled fnt© a potent army. Bertram Winburne, his son, and Harold Wallop, €ould only assist him as individuals, for lord Widdrington, without loss of time, summoned his vassals, and led them to join $e ^Drces drawn together by the regent, at 4
authority. But the disaffection of this body of men soon became manifest; for the regent him¬ self, receiving a message from Henry, en¬ treating he would riot oppose 5 his justifiable endeavours to recover His inheritance ille¬ gally withheld frdtft him, publicly declared he should comply with so reasonable? a re¬ quest; and the greatest part of the army expressed th^ir readiness to act in the same cause, with loud acclamation^ LordWiddrington now found himself left with only a few private gentlemen, who, still preserving their Ibyalfy, hastened wifri him, at the head of hi$ own vacate, dravvn off from the body of rlie revblters, towartls W 7 ales, in order to favour the urthappyKing's return from Ireland. The succee^ingeVefits* rkcdncisely stated* to his daught^ Margin^; in the following ^ 6 letter,
letter, sent by a messenger who only fore¬ ran by a few days the arrival of the success¬ ful Henry in London.
" All is over, my dear Margiana. ling land has no longer a King; for we must not prostitute that sacred title to an usurper. •* I met my sovereign at Milford Haven, and swore never to desert him, so long as he did not desert himself. But Lancaster's star predominated, and he has conquered by arts as well as arms. " Of twenty thousand men who landed with Richard, three-fourths tvere drawn from their allegiance; and he fled with the slen¬ der remnant left to Anglesea, while I staid behind, to watch and harrass his enemy. But the treacherous Northumberland, with loyalty on hh lip, and falsehood in his heart, deputed by the Duke, pursued the devoted monarch, and tempted him back to his
his ruin. Richard, witheasv faith, believed his professions, and consented to return with him, hoping to find a subject, where he found a foe. ' f 1 joined my royal master on his road, and accompanied him, as it was my duty. We wished for a conference with Henry. His fate seemed to urge him on. Flint Castle was appointed for the place of meet¬ ing. We went thither, and on the follow¬ ing day the Duke arrived there with his whole army. The scene that ensued no time can blot from my remembrance. In¬ solence on the one hand was returned by abject submission on the other. The sceptre fell from Richard's feeble grasp, and was seized by his mortal foe, who is preparing to conduct him to London, and will pre bably make a shew of his captive in the towns through which we shall pass. " I hate to follow this Lancastrian herd, yet I cannot bear to forsake the King. " My brother has accompanied Henry from the north, but will not be persuaded to
to the court; long disuse having rendered him as averse to a residence there now, as disaffection to the reigning house did be¬ fore. His son, however, with Harry Percy, and the rest of that hot-blooded house, swells the usurper's train. " I shall be with you and my dear Gene¬ vieve soon after you receive this letter/'
Heavily was the heart of Margiana op- pressed, and melancholy in her eyes was the procession ihat passed before her fa¬ ther's door, when the royal prisoner was led along in his way fo fhe Tower, by his insulting and prosperous rival. Yet few there were to share her grief; for the fickle town, long weary of Richard*s inacthe reign, seemed in a delirium of joy. The thoughts of Isabella's sufferings now rushed on Margiana's mind, and the duty and respect owing to the unfortunate called her
her from that retirement she had never yet left since her mother's death. After an hour given to the satisfaction of seeing her father safely returned, she joined the at¬ tendants of the unhappy Queen, whose sor¬ row was deeply participated in by the ladies of her court. It was Isabella's wish to be restored to her own countrv, since neither the life nor freedom of her husband conld be expected; and she proposed applying to the usurper to that effect At present, she was treated by him with due respect, and had received assurances of his protection. During Lord Widdrington's absence, and the seclusion of his daughters^ Lady Rothes had been at some pains to display the. licentiousness of her chanxtcj;. Her hus¬ band, who, as a subject of the King of Scotland, took no part in the disturbances that agitated the kingdom, was much en¬ gaged by embarrassments that occurred in the afTairs of his* brother-in-law; embar¬ rassments rendered more perplexing, and consequently
consequently more tedious in their dura- tion 5 by that young nobleman's absence with the regent. Owing to this circum¬ stance, the restraint, slight as it was, that Lord Rothes's presence imposed on his wife, was too frequently withdrawn ; and her ap¬ pointment about the person of the Queen always afforded her a pretence to be at the palace as often as she chose. There, her levity, her wit, or her charms, drew around her almost every courtier who by any particular circumstance had been detained in London; and after the return of the Duke of York from St.Alban's, the circle of her admirers was considerably augmented. Of these, the most in earnest, and, for a time, apparently thc most favoured, was Lord Latimer, who seemed to live but in her presence, and received such gracious treatment from the object of his adoration, as might have encouraged a much more torpid
torpid lover to give utterance to his feel¬ ings. He declared his, and was neither dis¬ carded nor even reprimanded for his pre¬ sumption. In fact, Lord Widdrington was the reign¬ ing idol of Alicia's worthless heart; but, in his absence, she had no objection to listen io the tale of another; and Lord Latimer chanced to be more beholden to nature for the graces of his person than were any of the others who stood candidates for her favour. To him, therefore, it was her amusement to attend, though without designing to proceed to any serious lengths. But woe unto her who ventures on such amusement at all! It is setting fire to a house, for the diversion of seeing the flames burn, and supposing they may be extinguished at pleasure. From being at first only occasional, the interviews between Lady Rothes and Lord Latimer
Lathner became frequent and regular. The Qoeen*s prh^ate indulgence of hergrief gave the former m u ch leisure, and she oft en walked with her new admirer in the gardens of the palace. But in a place so public, their con¬ versation was very liable to interruption, and he conjured the lady to indulge him with her company in a rowirig-boal, that might conveythemalittle way down theriver,to<V opposite store, where the meadows oh% ed them pleasaitfer and more secluded v/ato. For some time she refused him; for though his flattery was weltrjftm, he had'not created sufficient interest in her heart to induce her to step very much aside for hfe gratification. One day, nevertheless, his entreaties be¬ came so very urgent, that, she consented, for once, to oblige him; and the following day and a particular hour were appointed, when he should come to attend her to the river side. It
It happened, however, that the regei sent for him the next morning, on businc of moment, which obliged Lord Latimer to ride immediately some miles out of London, whither it was not likely he should be able *o return under two days. So pressing was the concern, it allowed him no time to see Lady Rothes, in order to apprize her of his engagement, and he was afraid of hazarding a letter by any ordinary messenger. Yet it was necessary by some means to account for the neglect of his appointment. In this emergency he thought he cottld not so properly trust any one with the secret of his intimacy with Lady Rothes as a young man of the name of Scroope> who lived with him, and whom he had brought up from his infancy, he being a sister's son, and an orphan, pe therefore acquainted him with the subject of bis embarrassment, and it being then within a few minutes of the appointed hour, bade him go to Lady Rothes,
Rothes, and acquaint her with what had happened. William Scroope had already seen the fair Alicia, and had paid her that tribute of admiration no one could withhold. He* therefore flew wirh alacritv to execute his commission, delighted at an incident that might procure him the future acquaintance of so handsome a lady, though she was se¬ veral years older than himself. When he delivered his message, it might have been expected that though Lady Rothes could not resent an involuntary breach of her lover's engagement, she might never¬ theless feel disappointed. But that was not the case. William Scroope had a charming figure. To $ light and graceful person he united the advantage of an interesting, beautiful countenance, His cheeks glowed with good- humour,
humour, and his eyes sparkled with intelli¬ gence. They met those of Lady Rothes > and became more animated than before. "How I pity my Lord Latimer!" ex¬ claimed he. t( How vexatious, how op¬ pressive must be any business that tore him from the society of such a friend I" " And in such delightful weather, too," said she, laughing. " The river would be enchanting on an evening like this, and the Surrey meadows Paradise itself." t( Yes/* replied Scroope, " with such an Houri." (t Do you think so ?" said Lady Rothes, half jestingly. " Well then, if that be the case, as the boat is ready, and 1 am quite prepared, suppose you turn Mahometan, and go with me yourself? Your uncle can never blame you for professing the same religion that he does." William Scroope was in raptures. He vowed an Arabian desert with such a com¬ panion
panion would have stronger charms for him than Eden without her; and in the course of their excursion madesuch progress in th© lady's heart, that she became more than half seriously attached to him. He entreated permission to visit her the ensuing day— " For, alas V* said he, (( my uncle will re¬ turn the morning after, and I shall see you no more/* She granted him the leave he requested, but desired he would not come to her brother's house, where Lord Rothes, who did not know she was at all acquainted with him, mightbe surprised to see him. " Make some pretence," said she, « for coming to the palace, and I will take a few turns with vou in the garden." It was not likely he should raise any ob¬ jection. He was at the palace long before the hour named, and paced the walks with all the impatience of a young man of four- and-twenty, in love for the first time. At
At length, Uie goddess approached, and the conversation of the preceding evening was renewed. "Re described his passion with such romantic flights of fancy, that she laughed at him, even while he most con¬ vinced her of his sincerity; and before he had said a great deal, she found he was describing the situation of her heart as well as of his own. There was a sort of summer-house at the entrance of a grove, near the bottom of the garden, and he begged her te go into it; « for," said he, u I want to t;dk to you at your feet, and I dare not here, because we are overlooked by the palace/* Lady Rothes refused, but he importuned her to comply. He would not be denied. " You are a child," said she, (i and have not been used to contradiction. I suppose I must bring you to bear it by degrees/' She then suffer¬ ed him to lead her in; and, sitting down, looked and listened with complacency to the handsome kneeling figure at her feet Before
Before she had been thus engaged many minutes, the door of the summer-house opened, and an unexpected person made his appearance. Lord Latimer had hastened to the place where, by the regent's order, he was to speak to a certain person on business of import™ ance repectingKingKichard. On his arrival, he found the man in question had gone to London by a different road, whereby they had missed each other. It was too late to return that night, but he came back the next day ; and after finding the person he had been in quest of, and transacting the affair with which he had been entrusted, he thought of Lady Rothes; and meeting one of her domestics, inquired where she was ? Being told at the palace, he hurried thither, and went immediately to that part of the garden where he knew she was most ac¬ customed to walk. As he had frequently sat with her in the summer-house, and she loved being there in sultry weather, he advanced
advanced towards it^ hoping agreeably to surprise her, in case she had, as usual, taken shelter within. But though he produced much surprise, it was far from being agreeable to any of the parties present, William Scroope started from his knees; and Lady Rothes, though her presence of mind rarely deserted her, was speechless. Lord Latimer was the most collected of the three. lie bowed with affected obsequiousness, first to Lady Rothes, and then to his ne¬ phew ; and after viewing them both for a few moments in silence—"Madam/* said he, f< I know not how I can sufficiently apologise to you for my intrusion. And, Sir," turning to the young man, ff I am equally at a loss to conjecture in what man¬ ner you will excuse yourself to me. In the meantime, I am ready to listen to any thing you chuse to advance/* " My Lord/' said William Scroope, with vol. i. <; respect,
respect, yet with modest firmness, e> you was once as young as I am now. If, at that time, a handsome lady had preferred you to an uncle nearly double your age, would you, or not, have acted as I have done ? If you say vou would, you yourself pronounce my excuse." Lady Rothes now interposed.— <e If Lord Latimer," said she, " examines the right by which he presumes to censure cither his nephew or myself, he will find it vanish into air. Over my actions, I do not imagine he will pretend to have any authority ; and surely, if a young man is blamable for mak¬ ing love, an old man must be ridiculous/* Lord Latimer was not an old man ; but he was not young enough to bear this sarcasm with the coolness due to a lady, however contemptible she might be. He desired his nephew to withdraw; and then, being a man subject, on very slight provo- eations, to violent gusts of passion, he gave such a loose to his resentment as terrified lady
Lady Rothes into tears. Even thh sight did not mollify him; and his fury was un¬ abated, when the noise he made directed two persons, who were just come into the garden in search of him, to the place where he was. These persons were Lord Rothes and his brother-in-law, Lord Lothian. As they entered, they caught the last words Lord Latimer had uttered, which were terms of vehement abuse; and the "visible distress of Lady Rothes was an additional subject of provocation, Lord Rothes was fond of his wife, and believed her free from serious faults of every kiud. Lord Lothian, even in a sitter's cause, was the same impetuous youth he has been described on occasions more nearly touching him. Both the husband and the brother laid their hands upon their swords. Lord Latimer, mad wifh rage, drew iiis, Lord Rothes, putting back his brother-in-law with one c ■* hand,
hand, attacked his enemy with the other; but the fury of the aggressor was unfortu¬ nately too hasty for his caution. He received - the point of Lord Latimer's weapon, and fell to the ground. Lady Bothes's distress was now lost in terror, and she stood a mute spectator of the scene ; while her husband might have continued bleeding, had not Lord Lothian run to the palace, and called for assistance. Lord Latimer, shocked at a catastrophe which had put an end to all his rage, knelt down beside the wounded man, to whom he tendered every service in his power; and when several persons hurried to the spot, fie insisted on helping them to carry Lord Rothes withindoors; where, on his wound being examined, which was found to be very near'hfe lungs, it was thought that, with great care, he might recover. He seemed extremely sensible of Lord La timer's
Latimer's attentions, and blamed himself for rushing, as he did, unguardedly on his sword; while Lord Latimer assigned some reason for the passion he had given way to, very remote from the real one; and, by degrees, assisted by Lady Rothes, whose in¬ terest was so deeply concerned to aid the deception, explained away the whole as arising from a mistake.
g 3 CHAP.
" ^*TT mtT■ tf^' "li™■!T"i|iSlJ 1 |itST^M^T^^WP
CHAP. V. Amihhh Ugline$*<™Som€tmes it i$ wise to shun Danger, The nobles of England had now new mea¬ sures to pursue, and new objects of ambition to obtain. Those who had assisted the dar¬ ing project of the Duke of Lancaster, now crowned King Henry the Fourth, looked for¬ ward to rewards proportioned to the mag¬ nitude of their services; and the only one who had steadily maintained his allegiance to his predecessor neither deprecated his re¬ sentment nor wantonly provoked it by a stu¬ died shew of disrespect, but steered an even course between insolence and adulation. Lord
Lord Widdrington, in effect, for awhile submitted to what, at present, was irre¬ deemable, though his heart was still attached to his former * vereign ; and he hoped the . time would come when sotne efforts might successfully be made in his favour. He foresaw that Henry would never be able to satisfy the craving expectations of the aspiring nobles around him, and that new feuds and discontents would inevitably ensue. Patiently, therefore, he determin¬ ed to wait until a propitious opportunity should present itself for the furtherance ot those views he secretly cherished ,* and, in the meantime, he recommended it to his daughters to pay their respects, with others of the young female nobility, to the Prin¬ cesses Blanche and Philippa, Margiana continued too warmly interest¬ ed for Queen Isabella, to whom she now closely attached herself, to do this with alacrity. However, she prepared to obey c 4 her
^er father's directions, and attend the new xourt. 3ut Genevieve's youth rendered th^e :^^ie eompliment from her less necessary.; awhile her love of retirement, and natural ;^iynets. of temper, would have made it more irton^ : Mas!gtafi^, therefore, without her $isler, wa»*t»tci>A4ic^di«^tePrincess^s,soon afie? stfeeir M he£«^c &mw&; ^nd^^eeiie entirely $oml t o ;her; wm .f$me$$&& 4^.- Ae«ta te and -splendour rf Ifeiry's iCQiirt, ;&r ecliping ^what that of King Biehard Imdievtar display- led. &B:h0p£sof favour from the fetier had rbeen k>ng confined to a few persons, many ;&£ ^hom were of little note; and he had generally been at ^nance with his Barons. Bu*.eitpjBC:^ti^©s fipoinBenry'a munineence were extended through the whole body of nobility, who crowded around him, much iaor« from selfish interest and jealousy of ®aeh oihpr, ithae fram .$ed love or loyalty towards him.
Many
Many Were the faces, toOs which Margiana now beheld for the first time; strangers who had never frequented the palace daring the late years of tumult and disaffection. The names of many of these were told her by her constant admirer,, Lord Lothian, who still persisted i« forcing his attentions upon her; and as she could not persuade him to render them less particular, she eodeavobr- ed to be amused by his gaiety, which was sometimes entertaining enough. The principal of those he pointed out to? her as having formerly been the foremost of the maleontents, as he was now the chief of the expectants, was the Earl of Northum¬ berland, whose pride and ambition were manifested in every gesture, He seemed to consider himself as second only to the King, whom he had been the great instrument of raising, and affected an air of protection to the less distinguished nobility. Margiana, hereditarily devoted to the g 5 Saxon*
V^ho had been most active in breaking the legal successidn; but she vainly strove to withhold her ^pprobatibn from the spirited attd*martial figure who followed the Earl, She inquired hiSUalne of lord Lothian, and was told he was the renowned Henry Percy, " that Hotspur of the north,** said he, " who spits Scotsmen on his sword like larks, or cuts off their heads, for tennis-balls. Oh, he is a bloody-minded fellow, with more of the Turk than the Christian in his soul; and, -I "warrant him, would reckon all this lost time, if he was not thinking who he should run through the body next. Look. to yourself, Lady Margiana, and keep out of his way; for if he sees, he must love you ,* and tf h£ loves, and makes the King his Mend in the cause, the King dare not refuse him. See how low he bends to thes golden'image that Nebuchadnezzar of Northumberland has set up! Yet what are the odds he does not throw him into his fiery furnace 'for the first oflence he commits
commits against the demi-royal house of Percy ?" " Indeed," said Margiana, " no so'vereign can place much confidence in a subject who has been guilty of rebellion to seive him ; for he who has committed one act of treason has but a short journey to take towards another. But let us have a care what we say, since all here may not be of our way of thinking; and I observe some strangers near enough to hear your re¬ marks." " So do I," replied Lord Lothian,; " and one of them is the mighty Earl of Westmore¬ land, whose interest, just now, might confer upon me the honour of a safer lodgement in the Tower than I should relish.*' " Your loyalty then, my Lord, is fainter than you would have me suppose; foj whilst the King is in the Tower, methinks a lodging there would really be an honour to any one. *' " Very true," answered Lord Lothian; " but it is an honour I do not covet, since GO it
it would debar me from the sight of her who is light and life to me. If you, lovely rebel* Kill bujt blaspheme against our present liege Lord, and secure yourself a tenement there, see with what alacrity I will follow you \ By Heavens, I would poniard the two fair Princesses, pretty souls ts they are, rather than not be in your train/* - Margiana now observed her father speak¬ ing to a youth of commanding appearance, who was leaning on Henry Percy's arm. His countenance proclaimed the hero; yet it was heroism east in a more courtly mould than Hotspur's. It instantly occurred to her he might be Ethelred Winburne. His figure corresponded with fhe idea of him die had formed; yet there was a cold re¬ spect in her father's manner, unlike the animation that always warmed his aspect whenever he talked with those he loved or thought weft of, *. She
She applied to Lord Lothian for infor¬ mation. " Hail," cried he, "• to the sacred majesty of the rising.sun! Look up with reverence to young Harry of Monmouth, who already promises to be such a Prince * of Wales, God wot! as England never saw before. Those who pretend to be prophets, say he will make a good fighter. There is no doubt he can handle a bottle very valiantly at present* I could represent a mere dignified heir-apparent myself, if I had the consciousness of a little royalty to assist me; and I wish the good people of England would name me the next in suc¬ cession, if it was only to afford me the op¬ portunity of shewing what I could do. But why do I talk of royalty ? as if that was necessary, forsooth ! Why, the third cousin of the uncleof the King's foster-brother may be sovereign next, for aught we know." " Are there any troops raising yet to favour his pretensions, my Lord?" said a young man, of very extraordinary appear¬ ance, who happened to be close behind Lord Lothiao,
Lothisn, as he concluded his speech. Si I would fain be acquainted with a pretender of such note. Pray is he at court to-day ?" Lord Lothian turned round in some sur¬ prise towards the person who spoke, and thereby gave Margiana a full view of a tall, large-boned figure, 'with a countenance rough as the knotted oak, and rendered more terrific by a quantity of bushy black hair, that formed nearly a complete oval frame to the hard-featured picture it en¬ closed. This apparition pursued his in- ..quiry, and his persecution cf Margiana's unguarded lover. " I feel particularly anxious," continued he, " to be introduced to a person of so much consequence; and if he happens to be one of my Lord Lothian's intimate ac¬ quaintance, I shall never forget the obliga¬ tion of being m;-.de known to him," *' Sir," replied Lord Lothian, with good- humour, <f I will do my best to find him out,
out, since it is your desire; but, 'w the meantime, to make you amends for some unavoidable delay, I will do you a much greater service, by introducing you to Lady Margiana Winburne, who is better worth knowing than any sovereign in the world. And now, pray, Sir, by what name shall I present you ?" The stranger seemed diverted by Lord Lothian's pleasantry, and answered in the same tone-—" That he feared his name was not of sufficient consequence to entitle him to the acquaintance of so fair a lady. But," added he, " when 1 return to Widdrington Tower, I may very likely boast of the honour I have had in falling within her notice at all." . Margiana's extreme surprise prevented her from making any reply.—'* Good Heavens!" thought she, if then this, at last, is the Ethelred whom his fathers partiality described in such charming colours !— this frightful figure, capable of inspiring terror, if
if one met him alone 1 Who, sther this, shall prescribe the limits of a parent's blindness?'* Lord Lothian, who, as well as herself, im¬ mediately conjectured his new acquaintance fo be Lord Widdrington's nephew, was now preparing to renew the conversation, when a young man, of the most engaging aspect and manner, coming hastily up to the rugged stranger, took htm by the arm, and speaking to him in a low voice^ led him away. (< By all that is horrible," exclaimed Lord Lothian, (C that must be your cousin Ethelred ! What a prodigious family like¬ ness 1 Who could have imagined such a spectre to be the miraculous youth we have heard every one who ever saw him in the north lavish such encomiums upon 1 The breath of life must have been* infused into Hercules's club, to furnish such a figure; and not one of the rough nobs has been rubbed iff/' ** It
" It must be confessed he is not very handsome/' said Margiana; C( but since all who know, him praise him so highly, how amiable must be the qualities of his mind^ that can make every one overlook, and even forget to mention, the disadvantages of his exterior,!" " Then if his interior be so much the more beautiful of the two,'* replied Lord Lothian, " why .do not they turn him inside out, and present to our eyes something they can endure to look at! for, by.Heavens, there is no bearing the sight of him at pre¬ sent ! But is it possible he can really *be your uncle Bertram's son ?—Hold, I see Lord Suffolk there, and as he marched to London with the rest of them, he is acquainted with all these country courtiers, I will step and ask him, and let you know." Lord Lothian, having received an answer to his inquiry, immediately returned to Margiana,
" Well,
" Well," said she, with a little anxiety, " is it Ethelred or not?" "Ethelred indeedl^replied Lord Lothian, " Ethelred himself! There is no chance of mistaking him after this. I shall know him again wherever 1 see him, 1 reverence Harry Percy's judgment in the choice of a friend. No wonder he has slaughtered so many Scots. I suppose while their eyes were fascinated by the sight of that gorgon, he had nothing to do but kill them at his leisure. But where, in the name of Beelzebub, has your cousin contrived to pick up such a countenance ? I have been told that his father is somewhat of a per* sonabterrtan. His mother must surely be a Med use herself/' > " No, indeed," said Margiana. " It is true I never saw Lady Rachel Winburne, but I have -heard she is a fine woman, and handsome. There is no accounting for sue h varieties in the same family. I suppose Nature had been in a sportive mood when Ethelred was created. 1 ' " And
< ft And a tine sight she has made of him," cried Lord Lothian. " If these be her sports, it is to be hoped she will be serious as often as she can." *' But pray/' said Margiana, *' did Lord Suffolk tell you who that was that came up to Ethelred and walked away with him ? Nature seems to have dealt seriously enough by him; and he furnishes a fine contrast to his companion." " Ah," said Lord Lothian, 4g how soon you ladies inquire after us handsome fel¬ lows ! Yes, I can satisfy you on that head also. He is an intimate friend of your lovely kinsman's. His name is Harold Wallop." " Who calls on Harold Wallop?" ex¬ claimed the animated club of Hercules, wh© now again was seen approaching with his companion, *' Here I have brought him at Lady Margiana's service. 'What commands will she condescend to lay on him?** Margiana raised her eyes to those of the person
person no abruptly introduced to her, and observed that hk were fixed, with a smiling yet respectful earnestness, on her face. She returned his salutation in silence. " What a pity/' thought she, " that these two can¬ not change figures!" She felt an involuntary confusion, but endeavouring to conceal it, she reverted to the rugged countenance, it appeared so ore safe 10 contemplate, and inquired after her uncle Bertram. It was ih *mia she strove to attend to the Hiiswer she ^received. Her consciousness that the handsome stranger's eyes were intently fixed, upon her, confused her thoughts, and her looias spoke her per¬ plexity* Lord Lothian was too quick- sighted not t^> perceive it, and feeling al¬ ready a sentiment of jealousy, he endea¬ voured to turn the conversation. " Uere is a fine display of beauty/' cried he,
he. " Have vou anv thing like this in Northumberland to boast of?" * f We are not used in Northumberland to boast at all," said the rough hero ; " but if we can return thither with hearts as much our own as when we came away, methinks we shall have something to be proud of." "IIow is that to be effected though?" said his friend, " unless, in our danger, we apply to Lady Margiana, and she deigns to ;;ive us her advice ? for she is said to possess the grand secret of always keeping her heart at home." " I doubt/" objected the other, " her looks would undo all the effects of her ad* vice. However, I should like to know what method she would recommend. 1 ' " Your safety must depend upon your own efforts/' said Margiana. ** Fortify yourselves, is the best and most compre¬ hensive counsel you can receive from any one." " But we are aot used to erect fortifica¬ tions of that nature/' said the handsome stranger, 4
stranger, smiling.—" Will you put us in the way, by telling us how you made your own ?" * ( I found it ready made/' replied Mar¬ giana, fr and with very little trouble have kept it in repai r ever since/' They were now joined by Lady Kothes, who, coming up to Margiana with the fa¬ miliarity of an old acquaintance, asked after her sister; and answered her inquiries con¬ cerning Lord Rothes, by raying he was so much recovered of his wound that he hoped in a few days to be able to pay his respects to the King. She seemed desirous of draw¬ ing away Lord Lothian from Margiana, his attachment to whom she had learned with considerable regret; for, in ease of his leaving no descendant, her son would suc¬ ceed to a very large share of his property, as being his nearest kinsman ; and the heart of Lady Rothes was not so devoted to plea« sure, but that interest also possessed its due portion of her thoughts. For the present, however^
however, her purpose was prevented, by the approach oi Lord Widdrington, who was seldom far from her; and he was ac¬ companied by the Earl of Suffolk, " I am glad to find you here/* said the former, addressing himself to the engaging Granger, " I wished to bring you and mv daughter acquainted, as you ought to be. How did vou become known to each other? Did Margiana's instinct point out her cousin, or was she told which was he?" " My dear father," replied Margiana, wondering at his meaning, " my Lord Lothian informed me." " Yes/' said that nobleman, " J have had the good fortune to found the future ac¬ quaintance of the fairest of women with ihe most fascinating of men,, in the person of this hero of the polar regions," added he, turning to the picture in the black frame, who, staring at him with surprise, asked him who he took him for ? " For
** For that renowned killer of Scots, and rival of Henry Percy, Ethelred Winburne/' returned tord Lothian. w And my Lord of Suffolk is tny authority." * f Pardon me," interrupted Lord Suffolk: " 1 told you that was Harold Wallop, and this Ethelred Winburne." " The first whose name I inquired," cried Lord Lothian, " you said was Lord Wid¬ drington^ nephew." Lord Suffolk laughed. M I perceive the mistake," said he. " No offence, Wallop, and I will explain it. Lothian came up to me a few minutes ago, and, looking after you two, whom he did not know, askecl me, whether that beuitching figure was Ethelred Winburne ? Forgive me, Harold; 1 thought the inquiry was pointed at your friend. I answered, it was. Then who jp his companion? he asked. I replied, Harold Wallop/' The rugged features of the real Wallop bow wholly unbending, he laughed with great
great good-tern per at the mistake, and af what had given rise to it; and addressing Margiana—" Please to remember, dear Lady/' said he, u that whenever Lord Lothian speaks of a bewitching figure, he means me; though I own 1 could not have believed it myself from any inferior authority. Who, after this proof, will dispute his judgment in a case of beauty? He admires Lady Margiana, and thinks me bewitching I —Never/' pursued he, to Lthclred, " never plume yourself, hence¬ forward, on your smooth face and Apollo figure, but yield to my superior attrac¬ tions/* " Indeed we must all do that now," re¬ plied Ethelred. *< And if the ladies here agree to behold you with Lord Lothian's eyes, you will be a fortunate man, Harold." " Truly," observed Lord Widdrington, < I think Wallop has begun to draw their attention already. Lady Rothes's looks have been fixed sometime; and I begin to sus- VOL. j, ir pect
pect that even my daughter's impregnable heart is yielding/' " Oh, not so, neither," exclaimed WalIf*p. if I ought still to retain some sense oT my own demerits. 1 am not worthy such a prize as your heart, Lady Margiana; but I assure you I know of one who is/* Lord Widdrington laughed at his blunt* ness; and Ethelred, colouring, lifted hh c>cs to Margiana'b averted face, who, feel¬ ing her perplexity return, took the first opportunity of joining some ladies, and walking with them to a different part of the room, Before she left the palace, however, Ethelred, observing her sitting down, se¬ cured a vacant seat beside her; and his con¬ versation was so general and so lively, at the same time that he shewed so much good sense, she could not help being pleased with it; and thought Lord Lothian more obtrusive
obtrusive than ever, when he approached, and continued with them till the party broke up. Ethelred then, claiming the privilege of a kinsman, led her out; and she returned home, where she found Genevieve anxiously waiting to hear her account of the new court. Genevieve had many inquiries to make, and was amused by her sister's description . of Wallop, and Lord Lothian's mistake, Margiana spoke much of the King, and the f steady dignity of his deportment, so unlike the juvenile levity that pervaded the man¬ ners of his predecessor. She praised the oeauty and affability of the Princesses; eommended the young Prince'of Wales much, and Henry .Percy 1 niore; talked of \he Karl-of NorfhmnberJaft&^s^hghty cat- uage; iand' then reVert^d* fe^Wifllfep', 'on v>hose encomiums she loved fo dwell, and : seemed • unwearied*'on* 1ftfe , ''sttbjcct; v 'ti!l lienevieVfcl-^Ah^sttWfcj ob^Hctl-^^'It ft < v v, very
very particular sister, you talk so long of people for whom we cannot naturally feel much interested; and you have hardly mentioned the name of Ethelred Winburne. He either pleased you less than any of the persons you have been at such pains to describe, or he pleased you. a.great deal tnore. Do be sincere, and tell me w hich was the case/* ,Margian& conscious that her sister's re¬ mark was t ju&t, and that she really had ^vo^ded the subject of Ethelred, was a little confused. However, her description did him justice; ana 1 it gaye t <?en,evieve the idea of a young man so perfectly amiable, that she smiled withmore archness than before, and said, " All in-good time, dear Margiana* ^thinks - y ou^bour ,k approaching. The neat* letter o^tH^le Bertram tvrites.about hig son, I w«?xd«r wfeat amswer *yoa will send hi$V?" "Why> the,sai)E|eI4idjJ>ejrore/' replied. gone
gone than it is at present. I own I think Ethelred engaging; but many a young man, with very indifferent qualities, can assume a pleasing exterior; and, even ad¬ mitting that Ethelred has mental advantages corresponding with those of his person, if does not necessarily follow that I must fall in love with him ; and till I do, I will follow our dear mothers advice— e continue Mar- '* * giana Winburne, and live in peace.'' So * * * . * ^ good n ; ght, sister; and do not give me up for lost, as vet." " * ! ' * * But notwithstanding* < this TighV answer^ Margiana questioned her own hesrt'as^oon- as she was alone. " I do believe/' thought 1 she, ""Genevieve" was half in the right.' V cdiild 'rtbt'he1p : thinking of Ethelred; aftrd yei't kid *not* care to talk about him. Let me be on' rhy' guard. If partiality creeps uf; poor judg¬ ment will be hbod-winked^direcHy; arid ii 3 I shall
1 shall suppose Ethelred to be whatever he elwses I should suppose him. I have a grea* mind to keep out of his way; and I can only do that by avoiding the new court. So J will confine myself to Queen Isabella's apartments, and for some time to come pay no more personal respect to Henry of Lancaster/ 1
CHAP
CHAP. Vt Jjfter Joy comttK Sorrow* i ?vf AR&UVA adhered"so steadily to her reso¬ lution, that Genevieve was convinced she" had been mistaken in her surmises; and LordWiddrington became surprised "he saw* no more of his daughter at the new court. He inquired why she absented herself? but Margiana was provided with sufficient- reasons in her attachment to Queen Isabella, and her desire to devote as much of her time to her as she possibly could whilst' she remained in England, without assign¬ ing the whole cause of her being seen so ; ^eldom, h 4 However,
ifowevef, after the coronation was over, Henry, who was far from finding himself secure on his throne, and was aware of all the deficiency of his^ie to it, affected the utmost splendour, and gave freqtie::i iinU sumptuous entertainments to his nobility, hoping, by the 'dignified condescension of his behaviour towards them, to attach them to his person, and by occupying their minda with lighter concerns, to prevent their looking back tco seriously on the revolu¬ tion thsj had effected, o-r forward, to any, scheme^jn favour pf the deposed monarch, ^hose days were spenjt in dreary captivity in the Tower* -. , Wh$xi the attraationiof gaiety, therefore, drjjw Jtaypuih of.either sex to the pakce, Mjargiana's .absence became still more re¬ markable; and her father, repeating his inquiries, urged her to join a circle, (t of which/' said he, " in my partial eye«, you &££ oae*of the chief ornaments."
But
Lord Widdrington's estimation, the bright¬ est gem that shone at court was the gay and fascinating Lady Rothes. Ever sincfe his return to London, she had been much more circumspect in her conduct than be¬ fore, and gave no encouragement to any of the charmed crowd around her, though she did not wish entirely to break off hei acquaintance with the handsome SeroopC* With Lord Latimer she held no intercourse whatever, and since his abrupt appearance in the summer-house, had hated htm most cordially. His nephew she considered merely as a beautiful youth, whom it was delightful to behold, and whose romantic flights of passion, whenever he had an op¬ portunity of indulging in them y it was en - tertaining to listen to. But the attentions of Lord Widdrington flattered her vanity, whilst his flue figure, and the recollection of their early attachment, softened her heart in his favour, as much as the heart of such a woman could be softened. Their h *5 public
public intimacy seemed authorised by the near degree of kindred she had stood in to his wife; and she either was, or affected to be, particularly interested in whatever con¬ cerned his daughters. Little as they had cause to lo/e or respect her, they could not avoid receiving her visits^ and otjies marks of her civility; and Genevieve, in par tic Ur lar, endeavoured to regulate ber behaviour suitably to her dying* mother's advice, who recommended her* to encourage the par* tklity Lady Rothes bad*shewn ia her fa\our during their first interview. * >> . i . Lady Rothes seemed sensible to those attentions, from .Oenetvieve, that resulted from this reeolkctiort, and professed heir anxiety that fche should be drawn out into the world, and no longer conceal the ad* vantages she had so abundantly received from nature. Lord Widdrington and Mar¬ giana both seconded her arguments; and Genevieve's shyness and dread of appearing in public were at length so far overcome^-
that though she would not *as y€t consent* to be introduced at the n^w eotirt, she agreed to be presented i& ^ueen Isabella, who still continued to admit ^ few select^ persons to am Use the solihide df her h^urs, at>d who, for Margiana's sake, tor-whom she^ was extremely partial, had often wished to ,^ee her sister. Genevieve, therefore, was honoured with the most flattering recep¬ tion ; and Margiana now had aa additional mothe for confining'herself to the limited society of the Queen^ apartments, since 1 she could there alone, when from home, enjoy the company of her sister* Lady Kothes was far from desirous'that' Margiana ? s attractions should be more dis¬ played than they were. Alt Lord Lothian's public hours were spent at King Henry's court, and'therefore Lady Rothes was well pleased at Margiana's abstaining from it.' She was in hopes, young as her brother was, and considering the- lightness 1 of his cha¬ racter, that absence, could she keep them (i (> for
f«r.irap fdtoitafefe tsme aeunder, might do mmh towards weaning iiim from his pi^ssion fbrMm^idM^' m& his constitution appeared t^fc^fe m string a consumptive lendency, that B.-p«son much less sanguine than Lady Botk9i^.*4ad equally undisturbed by sisterly aDfectioib/jBJght well look forward to the probable cbaace ^ hm leaving the world unmarried, i.. ' '' >* i«'' . * Margiana easily penetrated the motives ol^her conduct/ and wished she could have communicated to ter father a part of those sentiments they excited in her own breast. But blind to the faults that disfigured Lady Kothes, he was* tfee 1 deaf adder to all those who hut nttem$t?4 to point them out* Vain was the voice of any charmer, when exerted against her influence, for every hour seemed to-add new force to the spells that bound him. But Lord Widdrington's infatuation for Lady Rothes took nothing from th« tender affection 5
ters, and in particular for M#rgi$na» Ever since he had become personally acquainted with Ethelred, and had had various oppor¬ tunities of judging ©f the rectitude of his principles and the sweetness of his temper, he had felt an encreasing wish that the con* nexion first proposed by Bertram might take place; but, knowing enough of human nature to be a^are that the best disposed mind will involuntarily* feel a distaste to¬ wards any subject enforced: by reiterated teasing, he resolved lo suffer the affair to fake its awn co«rse > atleast-ibr a time; and, without ever mentioning his nephew to Margiana, contented himself with en¬ deavouring to promote their further ac¬ quaintance. And herein has views were se consonant to those of Lady Rothes, that she seconded them to the best of her abilities, and spoke the simple truth when she de¬ clared, few things would impart to her more satisfaction than an immediate union be¬ tween Margiana and Ethelred Winburne. . Margiana,
^MargimiiiJ^lf-stmpecting her father^- ffiotlve-faf'Wfehing- her re-appearance af th^^new ccnrft, ha^f-afraid of her sisterV raillet^y, at%d unaccountably dreading "est her aflertions shouldi no longer continue in her>owh powef/was extremelv loth to barat-d them, by venturing from her secure retirement. But when the King made a' party to enjoy the summer and country amusements at Windsor, and the Princesses invited Margiana, with a number of other Irfies, to acconvpany them, sJ*e found her father so very solicitous for her compliance, that she at*ouce determined to forego her mtft inclination, and oblige him, Lady Rothes was one of those* who wer*> asked, and as*Lord Widdrington held him* self obliged logo, she was extremelv anxious to make one Of the party also. Her situa¬ tion would not have been embarrassing to an affectionate wife; but it was highly so to her, * Lord Rothes, though quite out of danger^ was wholly unfit to attempt even s^ . ' ' short
MA»GrANA» 159 short a journey, and she could not with de¬ cency leave him if he continued in*,London. She undertook:, therefore, to convince him that he was very well able to move to-so trifling a distances and gave his surgeon, a man she knew .to-be extremely obsequious to the wishes-of his employers, a hint to assure his patient that a change of air was» of all advantages, the most likely to contri¬ bute to his reco\ery. The good-natured Lord Rothes was r the more easily persuaded to disbelieve the in* temal evidence of his owrr<weaknessy be* cause he knew his staying* from Windsor would confine his wife in the town-, -which he supposed would be unpleasant to her^ though he was far from suspecting all the reasons why ; and. he finally agreed to go; though it was absolutely necessary he.shouid be conveved in a litter. Lady Kothes, to whom self^gratification was the grand law, of nature, was happy ia tike
the prospect of having even more of Lor^d Widdbrington's society than she coidd b$ indu%€sd^with in London ; and rejoiced also that she should be able to keep a watchful eye over her brother, whom she designed to interrupt as much as possible in his pur¬ suit of Margiana; while she hoped, by various means, and with Lord Widdrington's assistance, to throw luueked very frequent* ly in her way. Margiana, meantime, sincerely wishing her exetrrsilon over, took an affectionate lea^e of her sister, who was left under the protection of Queen Isabella; and accom¬ panied by her father and Lady Rothes, who accommodated their pace to the conve¬ nience of the invalid, ro^e down to Windsor, where, on hh immediate arrival, Lord Rothes did not seem to suffer so much from fatigue as on the following day. He forbore, how* ever, all complaint, which he thought would look like reproaching his wife for the com¬ placence he had shewn to her wishes; and, concealing
concealing the return of fever that he was conscious had taken place, even suffered himself, on the third morning after their coming to Windsor, to be conveyed into the Park, where several of the party, in¬ cluding the Royal Family, were amusing themselves by trying their skill in archery. Lord Rothes was placed Hinder the shade of a large tree, from several of t&e branches of which the prize arrows were suspended ; and for some time he appeared to be en¬ tertained by the sport, which He viewed at his ease, Margiana, who very much respected this worthy man, and lamented that so mu h goodness of heart should be abused, sat on the grass beside Mm; rind that she might bear him company, and*assist -him -when¬ ever he wished to alter ;his position, de¬ clined taking any ofruer part than that of a' spectator in the diversions of the day. She
She was" here soon joined by Harold; Walfdp, on whose mind she had left air impression as favourable as he had done on her's, He threw himself down by her side, and fell into conversation ori the scene be¬ fore them. " So you will not deign/' said he, M to contend for a pri^e at our Olympic games* So much 1he worse for the Prince of Wales." " Why for him, Wallop?" said Lord Rothes. €t Because he distributes the prizes to the ladies, as the Princesses distribute them to the men ; and it must needs give any man pleasure to bestow a reward where there is an union of merit both mental and per¬ sonal. Had Lady Margiana stood forth as a competitor, and proved successful, he might have enjoyed that satisfaction to-- day/ 1 " You have made good use of your time since you came to court/ 1 observed she^ *.r "nd
"a^id seem never at a loss for a compliment. But it is hardly possible 1 could have suc¬ ceeded in a contention of this nature, fori never practised archery in my life, and I have not even the least idea how to take aim at any object." €< Ah, then/ 5 returned Wallop, " none of the ladies' here could* have had thc least chance against you; for, in my opinion, she who takes no aim is the surest to wound. Most of the fair ones present seem studious enough, and appear Id have more objects in view than the bull's eye. Look at that pretty little merry-faced brown girl, with a bow in her hand. For one glance she casts towards the mark, she bestows two on Ethelred,—You may as well be quiet," continued he, as if speaking to her, " for that is not the way to win him, I promise you. However fine your eyes may be, they would please him better; if they were now and then cast a little downwards/* " But I assure you/* said Margiana, who wished to prevent - his further remarks, <( your
"'your friend .would be thought very diffi¬ cult to please if he was not delighted with fcl^t young lady's conversation, for she is one of U>e liveliest and most agreeable girls I kxu>w. Met &arae is Clara Castles. She is a particular acquaintance *of Lady Kothes, and a general favourite." . .- *' No oflfeivce :to her, or to you either,'' ^epMfijIi^afllopri'i but J mil venture ti wager,sh^inev^r i)ecoB^es n -favourite with &th,elr$d, .;: ^ Why , ? sl>e Awaks as bold as Ve n* geago q e r:n , J t ^ead? distress in his ey e. She seems talking him to death ; and I warrant he would rejoice at any-fair pretehce to :mn imv^ ft&m herl -Aet>the part of a oo nsidetv ale kk*sw0&ian s Lady MaTgiana, a ad ?give him>a^igMal ?N>«rtef> this way/- . f* f N© >in^ked^.'f answered she, laughing. ?' Uiim-. jookiaii^ve ©rTended him, it is but rea^c^abfe^e should have an opportunity of ^e|)atfings^he.dan|iige by her discourse ,* and yonrfriend will tki&tlwt too entertain- ingv-to preserve his displeasure h>U g.'* .^Vfttt he isa^odd foHow^ and hates to
be entertained. See 1 he casts an implor¬ ing eye towards us for assistance. Hard¬ hearted lady ! 1 find no one is quite per¬ fect. I thought you very nearly so; but I perceive you have no sense* of compas* sion." Saying this, Wallop waved-Iris hand, having caught the attention of Sthelred, who instantly quitting his companion^ obey¬ ed the signal with alacrity; and making his obeisance to his cousin, sat down near Lord Rothes* fi How do you feel yourseff ? v saidWal- lop, to him, drily. " Very much pleased/' returned Ethelred, "by this lively, moving picture; but, I own, not deeply interested itr the success of the archers. Percy says tit is tamfc work) and swears-that breakbg a couple of colts would ih^ve; a horded far finer? sport. He * has laid himself 4o\nv to, sleep, in yonder comer, and has d$&r«d either'ymr#r I will wafee
wake him, when all is over, and it is time to go home/* ^ u Oh, then/* cried Wallop, <( send Clara Castles to hint, by all means, and he will be in no danger of oversleeping himself." " Who is Ciara Castles? I do not know the name/* " But you know the bearer of it. ~You have just been taking a large dose of her administering, and your cousin and I have almost had a dispute concerning the effects it will produce. Therefore, pray tell Lady Margiana how you like your new acquaint¬ ance." if Oh, certainly very well/ 1 replied Ethelred, with a smile——" but Lady Mar¬ giana 5 rather better/' he added, in a lower v&ictei' 1 -. * J . *«But Lady .Margiana will not take the bow in hand/' said Wallop; " so I am nsot likely* fb> be more interested to-day than yoni or iior*} Percy r and even now 1 feel rtfttdyto'ask, in Scripture language/What dftl'we come out^for ^o see ?" *^ * t . ' " I think "
u I think/' interposed Lord Rothes, "you are two very saucy young men. Here is a number of very handsome women, assem¬ bled in one of the most beautiful parks in the world, on the finest* day imaginable, and yet you are not satisfied, I am at a loss to conjecture what you .\ould v^h for more " ** I profess myself to be perfectly satis-- fled/' cried Wallop ; *' and 'f you take the trouble of obser\iug how Winburne is em¬ ployed, you will scarce doubt he must be so too." Margiana, who had been looking at Clara Castles preparing to shoot, turned her eyes towards Ethelred, at this remark, and per¬ ceived him gazing at hei, with an expression * of seriousness, as if he was endeavouring to read her character in her countenance. That sort of confusion she had pnce,l$efore been sensible of now again distressed b$r; i and Etheked, observing it, instantly r^lie,v^d - her, by saying, he ha4 r ncyej > ^eo)[i,%^t|'f|^r > likeness
likeness than what subsisted between her and his uncle. Lord Rothes agreed with him; and asked her if there had not been the same degree of resemblance between her mother and Lady Genevieve ? She answered " there had; but that, in her opinion, her s'-ter was, if possible, still handsomer than Lady Wid* drington could have ever been/' " If what I have heard be true/' observed WaIlop s " that must have been the case; for I have been told Lady Genevieve is handsomer than her sister; and if so, I think it necessarily follows she must possess more beauty than any body else/* '* Upon my word,'* exclaimed Ethelred, *' Harold growsoiiite a gallant man* I never hea*d tints say half so much to a lady be¬ fore." «' l^icVer thought half so much of a lady befbife/* returned he* " Pray Heaven I be no? falling in love! I should make an un- gak&ttsti&or* wiUl^ny bewitching figure, as
MAHOtANA. as Lord Lothian calls it. However, I scorr^ to fly from dagger, and now profess myself ■ Lady Margiana's knight, from this time forth , for evermore. And you may depend on. It, dear Lady, you will never be troubled with any rivals. No one will ever think it worth their while to tempt your knight from his allegiance. He is much more likely to scare away all your former ad-' mirers." " Lady Margiana will wrH ^kon that an espe¬ cial service/' said Lord R(.nies. fC I believe bhe does her utmost to disperse the herd of them herself; but it is not very surprising >he cannot succeed/' Their notice was now attracted hy a graceful figure, who was led by the Prince of Wales to the spot from whence* the archers took their aim, and followed by his brother, Prince John of Lancaster, and the Earl of Widdrington. Her person was sg elegantly* formed, heF step was so majestic,, she ap*» peared to be the <rueexi of the^ assembly ; VOL, I { J ia d
and her beauty and complexion were of that dazxling kind, they seemed to cast a radiance around her. It was the fair and faithless Alicia. The animation that instantly lighted up X,ord Rothes's countenance bespoke the lover rather than the husband ; and he was strongly agitated while she adjusted her bow, and fitted several arrows to it that were handed to her by Lord Widdrington. The whole presented an unpleasant pic¬ ture to Margiana ; and the more so, as she taw the penetrating looks of Ethelred fixed on it, and then turned towards herself, as if to observe the effect it might have on her feelings. She made no doubt her father's attachment to Lady Rothes was publicly spoken of; and supposed it but too pro¬ bable that the worthy man near whom she was sitting was the only person who had never heard of it. She looked at Wallop. His
His eyes were bent on the ground; and, without raising them, he broke the awkward silence that prevailed. He asked Margiana, " If she did not think ' there was something peculiarly pleasing in the appearance and manners of the Prince of Wales ? * f With all his faults/' said he, " and with reverence be it spoken, he has a plentiful,. crop of them, I like him better than his brother; I mean Prince John, for the others are children. There is a coldness in John's - character, which makes one fear he will never be better than he is ; and he Is obsti-- - nate upon points of no moment. Whereas young Henry is resolute, where resolution u required, and is docile and easy about trifles; with a spirit and warmth in his tem¬ perament, that, I think, will.lead him to do.-, great things when he is king of England/' "They lead him to do strange things, .' now he is heir-apparent," said Ethelred, .; *'■ and make his father's heart ache verv 1 ~ often.
F often. It isastonishing what satisfaction he c^n derive from the company of such a crew T as he associates with; drunken brawlers and revellers—I had almost said thieves and pickpockets. 1 ^ '"'Well, well/* retorted Wallop, " a so¬ vereign ought to know thc world. He will be the better able to govern all classes of his subjects/* ''* r And I will forgive him/* said Ethelred, ** if the first act of his government be to hang half his present companions.** Margiana observed, " She was surprised his manners should be so courteous as they were, considering the society he chietly frequented/' '"A proof/'criedWa]lop, "that his mind is not naturally low. I acknowledge, some very black clouds obscure this youthful planet at present; but we shall see that in time it will break forth with a splendour that will astonish us all; and perhaps ren¬ der Henry of Monmoath the boast of England/' A loud
A loud shout how irttcrrtipted Harold Wallop. "She has won it! the beautiful Lady Rothes has Won the.prize!" exclaimed a hundred voices at once.' Lotd Rothes, weak and rtenotis from the state of his health, shoolt in eterv limb. Ilk wife, still W* by the Prince of Wales, advanced, look¬ ing witchcraft. Lord Lothian, sent by the Prince, ran forwards to the large free, Tor «ne of the prizes, which was to be bestowed on the lovely conqueror, and crying as he approached, " Victoria !" was preparing to reach it down, when Lord RotHes, who from. respect had 'arisen, as the Prince drew near, forgetting at once his Weakness and his wound, exerted himself to prevent his bro¬ ther-in-law ; but in stretching to reach the fatal arrow, he overslept himself, and falling against a corner of the bench he had sat on, he lay without motion. Ethelred and Wallop were the iirst to ^ 3 raise
raise him up, and with great alarm they discovered he had fainted, and was bleeding at the mouth. Instantly the festivity ceased, and all was confusion and affright. Lord Widdrington gave his assistance to Lady Kothes, who was, or seemed to be, violently terrified; whilst Ethelredi his friend, and Lord Lothian, gently laying Lord Rothes at length upon the bench, conveyed him into the castle, where every means was put in practice to recover hiiu. In a few minutes he was restored to his senses; but his breathing was so greatly oppressed, it was with the utmost difficulty he could speak. The King's surgeon, who ^tended him, declared his apprehensions that he had broken a blood-vessel near the situation of hh wound, and that he was bleeding internally- At that time styptics were little known, and absolute rest afforded the only chance for the life of Lord Rothes. Lord Widdrington, his nephew, and Harold Wallop, never quitted his bedside; and to¬ wards
wards evening, the blood having entirely ceased to flow from his mouth, they began to conceive hopes of his amendment; hopes, however, which the surgeon was far from encouraging. Margiana, in the meantime, directed all her attention to Lady Rothes, more to oblige her father than because she believed that lady laboured under any insupportable degree of affliction. However, she went every half hour to the door of the sick man's apartment, and returned with the accounts she received. It may be sup¬ posed her wishes for his recovery were very sincere. As he grew weaker after the close of the evening, she would not go to bed, nor leave Lad} .othes, who at length insisted upon making her inquiries in person, Margiana took great pains to dissuade ner from doing so ; conceiving that the agitation he might feel at the sight of his wife would be very 14 likely
likchr to prove fatal to him ; but her endea¬ vours, as friendly as they were judicious, were exerted in vain. Lady Rothes per¬ sisted. " Suffer me at least/' said Margiana, " to go before you." And, without waiting for her answer, she .ran lightly on/and, halt (Opening the door, gently called her-fbther. Shelved came, and,, taking her hand, sard, m a low voice, Si I fear all is o\tr. He has relapsed into insensibility, and it is scarcely 1o.-be perceived that he breathes/" , ''-Good Heavens/' returned .Margiana., *'.'how*haH we keep Lady Rothes away? 45he is.coming after me, and is resolute to see him/* " Why, let her see him/' said Ethelred. "She can do no more harm now. Siie can never, I am afraid, disturb him again/' te Bring her in/' said Wallop, who, ad¬ vancing, with tears in his eyes, had heard -Ethelred'slast words, and supposed they re¬ ferred to Lady Rothes.— " Bring her in ! The sight will do her good, if she is capable of being benefited at alb" He
He had scarcely spoken 4 , when she ajr peared. Wallop, faying hold 6f \ier hM&, in silence, and i^ith a severe an f d sblemri gesture, led her forward to the side of th^ mattrass where her husband lay, ftte h'eaA sunk oh Lord vv 7 iddfirigtbrt's sHdtildbr, and- the paleness of death in his eoufttfenartct. Wallop pointed to the awful scene with the hand he had at liberty, whilst with the other he heavily preyed oh Lady Rothes's arm. But still he spoke not a word. She stood aghast, and her features manifested the horror she felt* A profound silence ensuedf which lasted some minutes; and was at length interrupted by a deep groan and a convulsive struggle from Lord Rothes. Lord Widdrington shook with the force of his own feelings. Ethelred hastened to assist him; and the next mo¬ ment Lord Rothes was no more.. Harold Wallop, silent as before, led the i5 unresisting
unresisting Alicia out of the room, to her own apartment, whither Margiana followed; and from whence they met Clara Castles coming in search of her friend. The Coun¬ tess's women received their Lady; andshe^ sunk in thought and conscience-stricken, making no opposition to whatever they chose to do, they hastened to undress and put her into bed, while Wallop returned to Lord Jtfiddri^t^n, .and Margiana, deeply effected, withdrew to her own chamber, , *'< >* ■ " * * "> ^ y * & ' *• * \ 'b l J ^ t i i ■ ' *
* J , * ' >
CHAP,
a*
CHAP. VIL Urfirmatt-~A Word and a Blow. . - Tub day following that on which the re¬ mains of Lord Rothes were deposited in the gra\ e, his widow left Windsor, and returned to London, attended by her brother, and accompanied by her friend Ciara Castles, Lord Widdrington, and his daughter. She resumed her usual abode at Lord Lothian's house; and the scene she ha«l lately wit-' nessed appeared for some time to have made its due impression on her mind. However,, as the settlements made upos* her at her - marriage were very considerable, and she * &ill retained so large a portion of the % Q charms
charms of her yonth, there were not many who supposed she would long remain deaf to the voice of consolation ; though a sense of decency forced her for a few weeks to submit to the irksomeness of close retire¬ ment. During this period, Margiana returned with satisfaction to her usual quiet habits of life; and the court continuing at Windsor, whither her importunate lover, Lord Lothian, again went, after the expiration ©f a few days, she spent her hours in perfect* tranquillity, either at home, or with bet sister, sn attendance ©n their beloved pa¬ troness, the amiable Isabella; who now> ira the time of her afQicdo©, was little disturbed by th£ attentionscvea 0f those who former¬ ly had been3be m®&% assiduous m paying her iheiff $om$* l! was^ith sineei&^refcM&fgiana p«r- eetved tot korrm was preying on hex ImliH mi m ^&£m*®&m> &**>g Henry's d^ughte^
Windsor, where they engaged that her solitude should never be more disturbed than she herself chose, Margiana, with un¬ affected solicitude, urged her not to (oregm the advantages she might derive from change of scene and a freer air. The unhappy Queen was for some time averse to the idea of quitting the town where her husband was confined; but at length she yielded to the persuasions of Margiana and a few other friends, of whom? Lord Widdrington always openly professed himself to be one of *he mc:t devoted, and consented to remove to Windsor for a short? period; resolving, however, when there, tcV confine herself wholly to the satiety of her own attendants. Of these, Margiana smd her sister were deeidedly tfeegreatestfavourites; aind they "both looked forward with pleasure to the: prospect of wattnng. on her there; but a? destination 1
destination was reserved Tor Margiana that she had not at all expected. Within a few days of the time Isabella had fixed for her departure, the capricious Lady Rothes became so weary of her con¬ finement in her brother's large, gloomy, and old-fashioned house, situated in a dark narrow street, that she declared a longer continuance in it would be insupportable, though CIaraCaStles,withgreatgood-nature, had voluntarily shut herself up with her, and their lonely hours were enlivened by frequent Visits from Lord Widdrington and his daughters. But Lady Rothes considered, that if she could secure the same society in. the country, where' her own actions would be subject to less restraint, the first half year of her widowhood might be much more cheerfully spent than where she was; particularly * during the summer months. Scotland* however, she thought not of. She disliked the Country; and so long % journey* *woald remove ber to© far from those
join in the ensuing winter. Her only son was in Edinburgh, it was true, but he was safe, under the care of a younger brother of his grandfather, the late Lord Lothian, and of his tutor, Chaston, who, when 'a youth, had been page to Lady Rothes, and had continued in the family ever since. Besides that, young as he was, not being above sixteen, he was already placed about the person of the Prince of Scotland, On his account, therefore, Lady Rothes suffered no anxiety ; and was only desirous to remove to some situation within a short distance of London. Such a one, Clara Castles readily pointed out to her. Clara Castles, hes parents being both dead, was the ward of an uncle, who at this time was just going to France on business concerning his own private property. He had a very pretty country-house, situated at Edgehill, in Warwickshire; and ibis houses at
Kothes-applied for the loan of, during the few months that old Castles expected to be detained abroad; arid he expressed great satisfaction at being able to oblige a lady who had honoured histiifcc£ with so much &f her ndtice. But Lady Rothes would not willingly have $ene to Heaven itself,with only Clara Castles for her companion: Lord Widdrington, the widower of her own cousin, might surely, she thought, be asked, without impropriety, to go with them, especially if his daughter Margiana, the prudent and discreet, as Lady Hothes, half in raillery, often called her, was of the ^arty also; and, Upon another account too, it would be very desirable to fevite her, &s aft exctirsron to Kdgehill would, for the present at least, effectually yentove'her iVorfi Loid Lothian's pursuit. Delighted with this scheme, #nd eagei^ for f$s se^mtt^lishment, Lady Bathes lose
ton, whose prevailing passion<it did but too much flatter. His love for Lady llothes was highly gratified by her desiring to retire into the solitude of the country with him; and there were other^considerations that rendered an absence from London pe¬ culiarly agreeable to him at this period. The natural candour and ingenuousness of his disposition were severely wounded by that respect and attendance he^could not, while he remained near the court, avoid paving to the man he deemed an usurper; and, conscious that his future ef¬ forts would be exerted to promote Henry's downfal, he bitterly reproached himself for every moment spent at the-palace; and endured more pain from each instance of that monarch's kindness and confidence, than the most mortal persecution could have inflicted. Yet, for the purpose of serving Richard, dissimulation was ne- ccssarv;
!S6 SfAR«fA$A, cessary; tn Lord Widdrington's esteem, therefore, it was not only lawful, but me¬ ritorious; To avoid such a necessity, however, though only for a short time, was so pleas¬ ing, that he without hesitation agreed to attend Lady Hothes to Edgehill; and, from tenderness for her reputation, he engaged also for his eldest daughter. e * Genevieve/' said Alicia, " has lived so little in the world, it would be injuring her to interrupt her present favourable oppor¬ tunity of seeing it, for she cannot be more properly situated than with the Queen. But Margiana, who is fond of country diversions, will be a thousand times hap¬ pier with us than if she continued about the court." " There is only one reason/' observed Lord Widdrington, " that leads rnc rather to wish Margiana had remaincd-where she is
is. However, it is not of much consequence. Other opportunities will occur/' Lady Kothes inquired what he meant ? * f The more I know of Ethelred/' replied he, " the more desirous I feel-that he may in time overcome Margiana's 1 indifference, her strange indifference; and their ac¬ quaintance might perhaps* have iirnproved more rapidly at Windsor-than in London. I am certain he likes her, both from my own observations and what I have heard from Wallop; and though she has hitherto, with a degree of coldness that to me ap¬ pears unaccountable, I had almost said supernatural, maintained her self-posses¬ sion, and shewn no sentiment resembling partiality for any human being, except her nearest kindred and her female friends, yet surely she may, by degrees, be won by the many advantages Ethelred possesses to re¬ commend him." Lady Rothes paused.— " I see not,* said she, (f why Ethelred may not be asked to follow
follow us to Edgehill. If he k as partial to Margiana as you suppose him, there is no doubt he will joyfully accept the invitatidn ; and, admitting beholds himself in some degree engaged 'to remain near the King, and not to leave his Northumbrian kindred, -atleast he can*stay with us as )ong as he likes, 'or as he thinks he oifght to do." Lord Widdrihgton wits much pleased by -this proposal—" But I tHitik/' said he, •' i't 'mmt not be'confided fo'Mai^ibna. She wiil take fright, if^he knows Ethelred is to -meet her at Edgehill.* Wallop seems her favourite; and I believe if he was to ac¬ company his friend, the society of the one would recortcile her to that of the other." u Send a messenger <loWn to Windsor then, directly/* said Lady Rothes. u Make use of my name, and ask your nephVw and his 'polar Bruin, that Ursa Major, to join a family-party at Edgehill a week or two hence. In the meantime, you will sfjra?-: to your daughter^ concealing as much 4 * w * hcacmc
scheme from her as you think necessary; and as soon as she is ready, we will leave th,is hot, disagreeable town, and court thesflvan deities of Warwickshire/* E\er ready to comply with the wishes of Lady Kothes, almost when they even mili¬ tated against his own, Lord Widdrington now hastened to accelerate a plan that so entirely met his favourite views. Margin a was both surprised and cha¬ grined when he acquainted her with his intention of going to Edgehill with Lady Rothes,and desired her to obtain theQueen's permission for herself to set off with him. She found him tco much bent en the scheme, to attempt at dt&uacjiijg him frojn. it; and considered that .she ought nuj^ for his sake, to refuse .attending hirn ; since her presence might not only prove some re* straint on Lady Rotjhesfc of whose,principles she had formed, the most unfavourable pi¬ nion, but, by continually reminding him of his
his children, it might leave him less exposed to the seductions of an artful and abandoned woman. Isabella, though sorry to part from her, readily agreed to spare her to her father, promising to take the utmost care of Gene%ieve; and that in case her removal to France should occur before the time fixed for Margiana's return, she would send for her> to bid her a final farewell previous td her quitting England for ever, and to relinquish' the charge of her sister. Sorrowful was the separation between Margiana and Genevieve, who had never before been parted, except during the few day's : the former had spent at Windsor. THey now almbst felt as if they were going to lose sighf of each other for life; and many were the assurances Genevieve ex¬ acted from her- Sister, that she would write to her by every opportunity that occur¬ red. On
On the appointed morning, Margiana joined Lady Kothes and her lively friend, Clara Castles, with her father, who, from a variety of causes, was in the gayest spirits imaginable. He was made happy by the return of his messenger from Windsor, with an assurance that Ethelred and Harold Wallop would be in Warwickshire in the course of the ensuing week ; he rejoiced at leaving the court of KingHenry; and,above all, was delighted at being the guest of Lady Rothes, whose dangerous society he should now uninterruptedly enjoy, amidst a small circle composed of persons all dear to him, for even Clara Castles was one of his fa¬ vourites. As he talked, and was the life of their party during their little journey, Margiana, more thoughtful, often heaved a pensive sigh to the memory of Lord Rothes.—" So lately gone!" she mentally exclaimed, "so soon forgotten! Oh! my dearest father, how comes it, with that fine heart of youris, you
you can so easily lose th£ recollection of the solemn past?" The travellers were attended by an escort of domestics, with honest old Kenclrew at their head; a precaution necessary in those days, when private resentments and national ferocity rendered the public roads unsafe. However, they arrived on the third day, without any molestation, at Kdgehill; and were extremely delighted, not only with the beauty of the neighbouring country, but with that of the fields and garden immedi¬ ately surrounding the house, The place was sheltered and nearly in¬ closed by an extensive forest, intersected hy roads, that ran in.various directions; whilst the house, screened from the, ex¬ tremes either of heat or cold, commanded an- agreeable, though- confined prospect, terminated.on three sides by the wood, and ©pen only in front to the meadows, covered with, the richest herbage, that clothed a gentle
gentle slope, at the bottom of which ran a clear broad trout stream. To persons who had long been confined in a noisome city, the very air breathed enchantment; and Margiana, in particular, who passionately loved the country* and had enjoyfed very few opportunities of being in it, almost fancied herself transported to a better world. The interior of the house was divided into a number of neat, small rooms, stocked with the plain, simple furniture of the times; and Margiana, being desired to st-* lect a chamber for herself, made choice of one thnr* forming part of an angle oi" rhti building, had a little window, from whence. transversely, she could see into a small chapel, that described the other side of the; angle, besides a straight-forward view of the meadows and the brook. A ihtlenvind* ing staircase led to this apartment; ani here, during the early hours of the morning^ it was Margiana's delight to sit, with her vol, i, K work
work or a book, at the open widow, listen¬ ing to what she thought the sweetest of all music, the melody of the birds, and breath¬ ing the fragrance of the rose-trees and seringoes that ornamented the rustic porch immediately below. Generally she was alone, but was some¬ times joined by Clara Castles, who, without exerting much penetration, soon discovered that her absence was often more agreeable *o Lady Kothes and Lord Widdrington than ;her society. They seemed to think that restraint be¬ came every day less requisite; and Margiana looked forward with painful apprehension to the time when Lady Rothes might judge proper wholly to discard it, and accept that hand it could act be doubted Lord Widdrington meant to offer her. Yet some- times Margiana half admitted a*hope that *the impropriety of her conduct might dis¬ gust her father, or at feast' convince him fiow
kow rll he should *ise his daughters, if he gave them such a stepmother. Yielding to this consideration, she hardly knew how to wish for an amendment in Lady Rothes's behaviour; and finally, with her usual good sense, determined to enjoy the present tranquillity of her situation, and trust to Providence for a favourable issue to her father's infatuation, and her own fears. Ihefinenessol the season, and theneioh- bouring shade of the forest, offered strong temptations for riding and walking; and many were the rambles Margmna took iu either way; happy when Lord Widdrington offered to accompany her, for Lady Rothes, who was not fond of exercise, seldom made one in excursions of that nature; and Margiana thought, whenever her father could tear himself from the company of this syren, that she could almost perceive the contention in his mind between his passion for her and his parental fondness. With studied care she avoided every word K 2 that
that could be construed into a reflection an the deportment of Lady Kothes; but anxiously strove, by the extreme propriety of her own, to place such a contrast before her father's eyes as could hardly fail to strike the sensibility of a man of delicate feelings. Her cheerfulness never dege¬ nerated into levity, nor her reserve into affectation; while the even serenity of her temper was a tacit reproach to the unequal fliahts that the spirits of Lady Kothes often w * • c hurried her into, whose vivacity was he™ quently overpowering, till, exhausting it¬ self, it sunk fier into silence, and sometimes, if LordWiddrington was not present, into fits of ill-humour. At present, this very caprieiousness seem¬ ed to rivet her lover's chains; but Margiana, young as she was, knew these were not the manners to retain, however they might have won, his heart; and that the spells of such a character, once dissolved, could never recover their force. All her atten¬ tion,
tion, therefore, was turned to the improve¬ ment of her father's affection for herself; not by trivial artifices, but by the honour¬ able mode of proving herself worthy of it, bv her intrinsic good qualities; and he, who having spent all his life in the hurry of war or the db-sipaiion of a couit, had never seen so much of Margiana in domestic life before, was surprised to find her merit surpassed even his own partial estimation of it, and became daily and hourly more at¬ tached to her. Nearly the first fortnight of their resi¬ dence at Edgehill was thus spent; and Lady Kothes, notwithstanding her partiality for Lord Widdrington, termed, as well as the sprightly Clara, to languish for more so¬ ciety ; when one day, as they were sitting at dinner in the haJl,Just within the porch, the door of which Stood open, a horseman rode up to the house, and, immediately alighting, discovered the rough honest fea¬ tures of Harold Wallop, lie saluted Lady k 3 Rothes
Rothes with respect, and Margiana with a cordiality that spoke his esteem. Clara he seenrsed hardly to perceive ; but told Lord Widdrington, who gave him a very friendly reception, that a messenger from the court w:^ >i!y a quarter of an houi's riding bo- hit h hn — <( though/" said he, " 1 have rot ,"d him of his dispatches, and have ga" 'J'd on to prepare you for his arrival, in j you should be disposed to answer your letters to-day, and send him' back to Loudon directly. If you do, pray do not Ee~.d me back with him " •o, certainly," said Lady Rothes. " On tl. (intrary, if you prove good company, •w* ,vA\ be desirous of detaining you both. Bi . II us the news of the court. What has happened while we have been here ?" " The royal family/* answered Wallop, fitf are still at \Vinds0r4 and Queen Isabella ar ' ^:d there some days ago, with a young b* - >y, the first glimpse of whom has re¬ duced the hearts of all our courtiers to tinder. I need hardly name the Lady Genevieve.
Genevieve, But while every voice was exerted in her praise, a dismal catastrophe happened, that has since engrossed _the thoughts and the conversation of all per¬ sons. Lord Latimer has destroyed himself, b$ falling on his own sword, in a tit of phrenzy f as was supposed. No other reason could be assigned for the action ; and he has always been subject to such impetuous storms of passion, as amounted nearly to insanity/* . Lord Widdrington inquired if no, one was with him at *he tim^ and how his rashness was first discovered? '* Early last Wednesday morning/'replied Wallop, " his body was found in a grove behind the castle, near a small green where he had been playing at quoits, with several others, the evening before. The last per¬ sons who were with him were Lord Lothian and Lady Genevieve/' " Good Heavens!" interrupted Margiana, " how happened it that my sister------" 7 4t Have patience, gentle Lady," said Wal- i lop. * f Your fair sister, who, is become k 4 very
Lord March, an attendant, like herself, on Queen Isabella, had been walking with her And Lord Percy, Now, Hotspur being a known admirer of the fair Mortimer, Lady Genevieve ; to afford them an opportunity of conversing, had loitered, to obscne the game of Lord Latimer and Lord Lothian, who were the only players left: and she was so intent on it, that her companions had returned into the castle before she missed them. However, as she testified the next morning, when the discovery was made, she came away immediately after, attended by Lord Lothian only ; for Lord Latimer, who seemed he'ited with liquor, declared he would stay out awhile longer, to enjoy the coolness of the evening. Only a few paces from where they had left him, he avss found, deeplv wounded, and dead, his sword, dyed vith blood, beside him. It is a melancholy event for poor William Scroope, his ne¬ phew, for whom, it is thotfgfit, he meant to make an ample provision ; but the sudden- * - ness
ness of the event leaves that unfortunate vouth nearlv destitute/' " Poor Genevieve/' said LordWiddring¬ ton, ' how shocked she would be at giving her testimony on so horrid a subject 1 \ et it must ha\e been necessary, to prevent any imputation being thrown on Lord Lothian, as he was the oniy o'her person pre&euC when they left the .vruched man." <( Indeed," observe i Wallop, "it proved of infinite use to Lord Lothian, for unluck;- ly, scseral hasty expressions hail passed be¬ tween him and the 1 deceased, which had been heard by various persons during the course of the evening ; and had he not come away at thc same tune with the Lad\ Gencricne suspicions, hotte\er unjutt, must hu.-\ >!abiy have fa lie:) upon him. His gratitude towards his iiiir preserver has been unbounded e\ cr since ; and they have become such friends," continued Wallop, turning to Lady Rothes, " that I should not wonder. Madam, if your brother was to relinquish his old pursuit,
and transfer his arfectipns from the uncon qtterable Lady Margiana to her sister." Lady Rothes turned so pale at this ob¬ servation, that it confirmed the opinion ■ Margiana had formed of her interested anxictv for Lord Lothian's never marrving at all; and while she was wondering how such a consideration could have weight, thc ^ moment after hearing the dismal end of a snan she had once and so lately encouraged io admire her, Harold Wallop interrupted her reflections, by gaily exclaiming, <f Here he comes ! here comes the gallant courier ? Pinv, ladies, give him a kind reception." Margiana, who had not had the least suspicion that Ethelred was the expected mesbenger, felt very much surprised, and almost vexed, when she beheld him spring from his horse, and enter the hall with a light grace, that seemed to delight his uncle, and to fascinate Clara Castles. Wallop's bard 4
bard features relaxed into a strong expres¬ sion of joy ; for to the feelings of this true friend, himself was only the second person in consideration. He was not merely proud of Ethelred, but proud for him; and so long as he saw him admired, aud heard him applauded, he appeared careless as to what was said or thought of Harold Wallop, and even to forget that lie existed. Lady Rothes affected a pleased astonUh- iiicnt at si&ht of the pretended messenger; but an airh smile, that gleamed upon the countenance of I oi'dWiddnugton,as he wel¬ comed his nephew, raised a strong belief in Margiana'^ mind that lit he bed's visit was the result of a piecoiiccrted scheme. ** Well/* thought she, " if that is really the ca^e, .Hirely they are ar more pains about nre than i deser\e It is not possible I can be worth all ihk trouble; and it has so little efleet upon me, that methinks I could Pncy Ethelred a brother, and never wish to view ;iiai in any other light.". x 6 lit deed
Indeed her reception of him was con formable to these sentiments, and had all the modest ease and unembarassed freedom of a sister; while he, happy to soe her again without the restraint that had attended their few former meetings in public, and pleased with the situation he found himself in, ap¬ peared to peculiar advantage; though he would willingly have dispensed with the presence of Clara Castles, whose notice of him, and attention whenever he spoke, were too marked to escape the most careless observer. As both the young men professed much admiration of the beauty of the adjacent scenery, Lord Widdrington proposed a walk, to shew them the neighbouring grounds, as soon* as the evening became cool; and drawing Lady Rothes's arm within his, he left it to the others to proceed in what order they chose. Wallop, who chanced at the time to be near Margiana, offered her his; and she was accepting his civility, v-hen
when Lady Rothes, observing them, bade Wallop beware of a service of danger; " iar^ said she, " if you lose your heart |p that quarter, ) ou will obtain nothing for your pains." '• Madam," replied he, " I do not admit Lady Margiana's scnicc to be a service of danger. We are never in peril from ladies, but when they have a design upon us; and then, indeed, it is a rare circumstance if a man escapes/' Lady Kothes seemed a little confused at this remark; and not being immediately ready with a reply, Ethelred said— " that Wallop had tco much of the gallantry of a true knight, not to serve without hope of reward;—and even should he lose his heart to my fair cousin/' pursued he with a smile, ,( there is no doubt she would treat it well and honourably/* " If Ethelred thinks so/' said Lady Rothes to Margiana, "he had better entrust you with his too. Would you give him any reason to complain if he did ?" "If
te If I took half as much care of it as I do of my own/* returned Margiana, " 1 am sure he would have no reason. But I should re¬ commend him to keep it in his own power awhile longer/* " And do you, Clara/' said Lord Wid- drin&ton, " advise him to lo^e it as soon as possible ' and we will see whose counsel he the most readily follows. Margiana's advice is calculated only for herself and a cramp- fish, I believe a Muscovite admirer would foe the most likely of all others to please her; for, from the little we know of that country, he would tight, drown, nay even beat her, rather than make love; and a voy¬ age to,the Frozen Ocean would win heir affections for ever/' While LordWiddrington was saying this, Margiana, who* paid no attention to what passed, walked quietly on with Wallop, from whom she wished to hear something more of her sister, relating to Lord Latimer's death*
u It is a very strange affair/' said he ; ce and there is a mystery about it that puzzles every one., they know not why. That he should stay behind a gay party, after spend¬ ing the evening in cheerfulness, to put an end to himself in so public a place, is the wildest tale that ever was heard ; and yet there is no disproving the truth of it. Your lister's veracity cannot be doubted ; and she solemnly protested Lord Lothian left the green at the same time with herself. Hasty words had passed between the two inbam- i mable he^ds, upon the subject of Lady Kothes, as some who overheard them aver¬ red ; but they seemed to be forgotten on cither side, long before the evening closed* In a word, it is inexplicable r and no lights are likely to be thrown upon the subject, as poor Scroope is the only near kinsman Latimer has left; and the man who inherits his fortune and title was toe distantly relat¬ ed, and probably is too much rejoiced at his death, to search at the bottom of any well for the truth/' While
While Margiana was musing on what she had heard, they reached the skirts of the wood; and looking back, perceived they had far outstripped their companions. Lady Rothes never walked fust; and Clara \\as too busy talking to Ethelred to make a F **"y rapid progress. Wallop laughed at tier gesticulations and volubility, though at too great a distance to hear what she said. i( What a rate that girl prates at !*' cried he. *' She ought to have fallen, not into Isthelred's hands, but his sisters. Ariettc would match her very fairlj." 44 By all the accounts I have heard," ob¬ served Margiana, " Arlette has but few op¬ portunities of exerting her talents that way. I understand her father keeps her very close¬ ly confined/ 3 " As much so as a state prisoner," said Wallop, " to the great regret of her mother, a most excellent and sensible woman. It is impossible to say what would have become of Arlette but for her; for beauty and a high spirit,
spirit, with total inexperience, are danger¬ ous companions." u But is it credible that she is so entirely secluded from all society as it is reported?" " Vo, it is not credible; but it is true. She is shut up at the top of the castle, in what has alwa) s been called the BlackTower, whenever any strangers are within the walls, with no other companions than her old nurse Travel, and the nurse's granddaughter, Maud, a girl of nearly her own age; and even when the family are alone, it is only as a favour she is allowed to come down stairs. No mortal man has she ever beheld, but her father, her brother, the domestics belonging to the castle, and myself/' <v Mercy on us!" exclaimed Margiana; " to what end is she so restrained ? What earthly purpose can it answer?" t( That was what your father had been inquiring/' returned Wallop, <( when he and Bertram quarrelled, and that fatal blow was given ; the recollection of which, I greatly fear, still rankles in Bertram Winburne's never-forgiving heart/* " A blow 1 "
" A Maw 1" cried Margiana; " a blow given to my uncle ! By whom ? I never heard of it." " How !" said Wallop ; " did you never hear your father and Bertram had a differ¬ ence, when they met with the late and the present King at Flint Castle ? and that your father, heated certainly with having sat long at table, rashly struck him r" u Good Heavens!" returned Margiana, u you astonish me! How did it happen ?— or rather how did it end V ** I have been behaving like a great block¬ head/' said Wallop. f< I am very sorry I have mentioned what Lord Widdrington assuredly wished to conceal from you, lest it sho.uld excite your uneasiness. However, as I have committed one blunder, I will not be guilty of a second, by telling you only half the truth, and leaving you in suspense In few words, thus it was: . • "On that night which the two Kings spent at Flint Castle, a number of their followers on either side supped together, and indulged, after the fatigues of march-
ing, tij) a very late hour. Lord Widdrington and his brother sat together; and from general subjects, their conversation fell upon private ones. On one, the nature of "Which you will probably be as well pleased if I do not particularize, they perfectly agreed; but, unluckily, your father thought proper to speak of Arlette; and from at fim gently reproaching Bertram for the seclusion he held her in, he proceeded more and more warmly, as the liquor they were drinking operated, till they both became extiemely heated; with this difference, that your father expressed all the passion he felt, and your uncle restrained his, only when thoroughly provoked, uttering such bitter sarcasms on Lord Widdrington's conduct, and the manner in which his daughters had been brought up, intermingled with some allusions to Lady Rothes, and the advantages they were likely to derive from her exam¬ ple, that at length your father, half mad with rage, and certainly not knowing what tie did, struck his brother a violent blow on the
the face. Both their swords were instantly drawn, and Bertram aimed a mortal stroke at your father; but they were soon dis¬ armed, and Ethelred and I, who had de¬ clined being of this supper party, were called in to make up the difference. That, however, it was impossible to attempt, with any hope of succeeding, till the next morn¬ ing. They were both too much inebiiatcd, and we could only keep them asunder for the remainder of the night. Nor was the quarrel at last made up as it ought to have been. Lord Widdrington expressed the ut¬ most contrition, and offered the handsomest apology ; but Bertram refused to sper-k or look at him; and as soon as it was light, for¬ bidding Ethelred, or any but his own fol¬ lowers, to attend him, he ordered his horse, and rode off for Northumberland; from whence we have heard nothing of him since. But I grieve to say he has an infernal tem¬ per, and 1 doubt not is brooding over the offence, like a sorcerer o\er a charm, for¬ getting the reparation that followed. " B t ut
" But dry up your tears, dearest lady ! Vie have unconsciously been walking slow, and Lady Kothes is overtaking us. Do not let her see you have been weeping." Margiana hastily did as she was desirod ; and, owing to the rest of the party joining her and Wallop, was prevented having any further particular conversation with him. But as she looked at her father with re¬ doubled tenderness, her heart became so full at the idea of the danger he had escaped, it was in vain she endeavoured to talk, or appear in her usual spirits. Soon after their return to the house, de¬ clining to bit down to supper, which she would not have been able to partake of, she availed herself of the earliest opportunity of wishing the party a good night, and re¬ tired to her own chamber.
CHAP.
CHAP, VIII, The Inside of a ChaptL No sooner was Margiana alone than, giving way to the emotions she had so long with difficulty suppressed, she sat down besiekr her window, and melted into tears. Vet it was from a tender sentiment of gratitude to Providence she wept, rather than from an| apprehensions that the concluding part oi W'ailop's information had excited in her fnind; for, however implacable in his re¬ sentment her uncle Bertram might be at the affront he had received, she did not for a moment admit the idea of his having either the will or the power of shewing it other¬ wise
wise than by a sullen retirement at Wid- driregton Tower, st No wonder/* thought she, rf my gene¬ rous father is now more anxious than ever to give encouragement to> Ethelred, as a reparation of uie injury he committed, though at a time, and in a situation that left him hardly answerable for his own actions. But how, oh! how could Bertram, outwardly preserving his temper, aim the stroke of death at his brother's heart!" Her blood ran chill as she figured to her* self the dreadful image of the cruel Bertram raising his sword against her father's life, and her temples throbbed at the recollection how short a moment there had been between him and eternity. w Oh! my dearest father," said she, " how horrid would have been the tale brought to your unhappy daughters, had you fallen in the very act of iasu&rag your nearest kinsman,
kinsman, and by that kinsman's hand * In a state of inebriety too ! At such an instant to have been forced into thc pre- sence of your Creator !—It is too terrible to think of." As she sat by the window, and the moon, which had arisen since she came into her chamber, shone through those of the chapci. affording her a clear prospect of its interior. she determined to indulge the pious wish of returning her thanks to God for her father's safety, in that place appropriated to reli¬ gious duties; and having waited until she thought it probable Lady Rothes and the rest of her guests had retired to their re¬ pose, she opened her door to listen whether all wzs quiet in the house ; and the absolute silence that prevailed convinced her she needed not fear any observation. Softly shutting her door, therefore, she descended the little winding staircase, now nearly dark, and trod lightly along a stone passage at the bottom of it, which was terminated, she
she knew, by a door that opened into the chapel, Through this she passed, and closed it after hew Filled with religious fervour, pious gra¬ titude, anil filial infection, she advanced to the rudely-sculptured altar, at the further end of thc chapel, and, kneeling clown, poured out her hea:t in thanksgiving ; while ihe moonbeams, streaming through a ivuTcu window on her beautiful ligure, gave life to a charming pictme of youthful piety. ^he h.:d spent many minutes m this em- jjlovaunt, and was preparing to rise, and return to her apartment, when she fancied she ueurd thc tread of feet, and slight whis¬ perings, iu the stone passa&c. She aro.se, ~mi looked down the length of the chapel iowards the door thiou»h which she had entered, I-recently it opened. Shj oistin- guisl.ed a low voice, a nohse as if some person \\a^ pushed forwards; and then the *oi. i. i door
standing in the inside ; but, as the light did not fa!! upw»i it, she was unable to discern who it rs or whether it wt^re a male or female »^ib. She continued silent and rnotiotdess, yet not from apprehension ; <c for/' thought she, " what have 1 to f-i^?" But, at length, recollecting that she herself was in so obvious a situation she could not but bephiuh percei\cd,shead\anrcda few steps, wondering that the figure she saw neither spoke nor mo\ ed. However, on her stopping, it approached her. It -poke; and bhe knew the voice io be Ethelred s. ft Forgive me, Lady Margiana/' fcaid h<% * f r-rd, believe me, 1 ha\e unwilling';, uir- piucd you." " Winburne!" she exclaimed; tc I am indeed surprised. 1 imagined all the familv bod withdtawn some time ago. I!:it } on ha\e as much tight to the freedom of this plate as I have; and U as just retiring v*l:rn vou caue. Ycu l.a\e therefore been no "uilcnuption
to blame (o disturb vou. I \rill once more wish vou a good nij>ht.** t{ Before vou go," said he, gerfh- detain¬ ing her as she was abo*t( to pass him in tie narrow aisle, ** suffer ire to ejq^Iain the cairo of my intrusion, We pM knew you was in this chapel. As soon as xcv, le f t u% Ciara Castles, pleased with the fineness of KiC night, wished to stroll round the hon e by moonlight. Wallop ?nd inyscT, of course, odercd to attend her; and Ladv Roilu-s and Lord Widdrington followcl v*. t fl-u-a, in her ga\ manner, rallied \WnIo:> »»n I !■, h;»vi«,^ v;a'xod uirh v< n tl-c v.ho'p evening; and jud^irff i\'-w the : ; o f 't r" . ,., : . r p, , wij-'u-e.v th.'t vot« •.-.•,:. pet <v < - m» rest, re;e ran »jp jairs t-. \oui leenv t'.^- •*;.it'v.- si:- ve:\ i f"tt h \ ^. dfe^p. io {• ' » i'.o* l :;i r. ■•.;! L ^ \-i;i^ J:e - ■••'lr * - ,- f M ., sue !i>o:e St prcve:-io .-..,': i \ f,i;rd. i;e' ' i nhcrrc:!i r, 1 <V .' whl ~;\ : ? i: ' '>, , ^onro'vn v.i;u!^w, pc.'t'^ ee: w.u '.-, r » % ; . ■ : ruei 7 linrl I-.'-.- ' :....-,■ -, ».. ,. ..
that it would be an excellent trick fo decoy Wallop hither, and shut him up with you. At first he onlv laughed ; but on her urging it, he said she should be indulged in her frolic ; and eai! ; r:;;* Wallop to foi low him and Lady Kothe-, he led the way to the stone passage. I followed also ; for having overheard all that had passed, I determined, in rase Wallop should be put in here, to remain en the outside of the door, and re¬ lease him, rather than von should he teamed. Lord Widdrington, however, turned the event differently from what anv of us bad expected ; for after Ladv Hothcs had sof:!v opened thc door, and whilst Clara w.^ en¬ deavouring to draw Wallop within it. he unexpectedly pushed me forward, and left me to regret the disturbance I occasioned you/* iC Oh V said Margiana, " there is no harm done, execpft your being trade a sufierer for Clara's idle fancy. I suppose we shall be able to escape from our pruon." " I fear
fr l fear we shall/' replied Ethelred, fol¬ lowing her as she proceeded to the bottom of fhe aisle; " but if you was no more a suflbrer from it than I antitrust me, you would nut wish our captivity so soon at an end/' Without returning any answer to this, Margiana tried to open the door; but, to her great mortification, found it was fastened. V/inburne could not help laughing.— " ? o i h ^ j u we a re really * ake n pr iso:; e rs I *' sa/i he. * f And I doubt I must see vou L'Ol; very grave on the occasion before I can lamtn^it. But, if\cu are extreme! 1 / st nous/ 1 he continued, " what can 1 supple but tiidt vou regret the cnanjre Lord Wid- drington has put upon you, and are to.yy tint I a in here, instead of the in ore fort jr. at j LarokP" " Vo*! mubt suppose wh.it \ on please/ re* plitd Mar Q iana, vex;: : v. l:eiug Uuisca^od«t. i -* such
there was a possibility of escaping from this foolish confinement, which miu>t have been tarried thus far by Lady Rothes. 1 am sure my father would not ha\e fastened us in/' " Do not be uneasy, my fair fiiend. there is no doubt but that whoever did, will release you before long/' Margiana now walked rouncl the chape!, but could discover no,other door; and the windows were diuYh*tbo nigh to think of escaping through them. 9i I believe/' said she, u we must watt quietly td! they chuse to let us out. I see no means of recovering our freedom." " *fruly," observed rtfhelred, " I suspect that those who lose (fnefr freedom in your company, are not likely to regain it very easily.— Cut come/'pursued he, < since you cannot yet get rid of me, exert your philo*- !>ophy to make the best of an unavoidable
«^i1. Let n?> at least, converse like;amicable captives. Tell me how you like your abode here. Has it proved sufficiently agreeable to pre\ent your wishing yourself.again in Londonr" ** I confer/' answered Margiana, " were H not for my father's ipeing at^dgehill, t!ie society is uot exactly what i should prefer jo all others; but being very fond of the coun¬ try, 1 find inexhaustible amusement frOm the beautiful rides and walks around ( the bouse/* 1( , u lwised;> said Ethelred. " I cannot iiha- gine Lady Rothes, considered in any point of view, likely ever to bec&ne a favourite of your>/' , " Not a favourite, certainly i yet, as far as respects myself atone^ I have no reason to speak otherwise than well of her. Hev be¬ haviour to me ha^ajwavs been not only civii, but friendly.'* " And it would lie utterly impossible/* said Ethelred, with a smile, " to guess the reason u% it is so. But you speak much l & more
do. Tor rny part, I think her a hateful woman/' (( That is a hard word indeed/' replied Afargiani. "Her conduct, since she has been in England, at Windsor, and smce'the death of Lord Kothes, has shewn levity* no doubt; but who shall sav that the dan* gerous possession of beauty such as her's might not lead them into some d' v;itlonS from strict propriety?" • «' l " I could instance one/' retinned Wm- bun)e f " who, xWrth youth and loveVbcs superior to her's, holds out an example of conduct that would do honour t > any a<*c* But since you accuse me of u^ing a hatd word 8g%'m$$ «I.ady Bo the®, *roay I not rail le%ity a nery inadequate one to her de¬ ceits? Did you ever hear tlvei real occa¬ sion upon which her husband iecuved that wnuud that eventually caused lus death?" f t * rtf ^«1 * ' Margiana mentioned the story that had been
been fabricated, and had generally gained credit at the time of that event. " Till lately," said Kthelred, " I believed ^ }ou do, that Lady Kothes bore no blame- ■»ble \\irt in that unfortunate affair; biit fincc the mi.-erable end of Lord Latimer, \\ :/k . St roope, whom I was lucky enough, f>n a c-[\x'J'A occasion, to serve, haa brought me acquainted with a chapter of privaie. Listorv , that throws her character into a very blac!; shade." He then related the encouragement given by Lady Rothes to that young man, as he had received the account of it from himself; aud Scroope, who, as he was quitting the palace gardens on the fatal night he had been with her there, had met Lord Kothes and his brother-in-law going thither, was at no loss to conjecture from what hand the unfortunate husband had received his wound.—" Neither, 1 fear/' pursued Ethel¬ red, " did the evil,stop there. From the expressions that passed between Lady 15 Rothes's
I!othes*s brother and Lord Latimer, the other night, there is no doubt thc latter had alluded to that circumstance; and in¬ explicable as the secret of Latimer's death at present is, I will never believe it was cc- casioncd by his own means." "Yet rny sister's testimony," said Mar¬ xians., vsnd she ztopt. '* ^^^^11^/11^^3^ Lady ! But might 'dpe -flot^fefc *d«WiVod ? < 'Might not Lord LothiarVleave ttespotwith her, and return to It afrcrwaix s?" " Hc3*eff*fcnb3iV5Jt* '^AaMred M'argiana, *". VHt fAe&tierlaibfy X3inevieverbelieved what '-i.h^;tfhinoeid*'t3Bftt if indeed Lord Latimer fell by. Lothiantastford*. how frightful and h#w' , wkiei^^spreec^haA'e been ^ the conse- quetM^su> I Lady Roth es*s shameful co nd u ct! Who, indeed, can pretend to say what eviis such conduct may not occasion V* * ( Yet me thinks," said Ethelred, looking wistfully at her/ i4 one very desirable con¬ sequence might result .from it. If it was known------ -" be hesitated—•*-'! what a eouft- ter- 5
fer-poison it night prove to her attractions! —Scroope bound me to no secrecy/* M;^r'n^a readily understood her cousin's m, rt t;j/ng, and her heart cordially thanked hi.n for the friendly thought '* At some future time," said she, u at some fitting oppottunity, y©u might pro- t-ably meniion it with effect; and perhaps such a one may ofier before very long; before------" " Before it is too late,^observed Ethelred, concluding £he sentence for her. w When it does occur,, be assured i shall not neglect it. It is my duty, and lam certain it is my inclination, to exert my utmost'endeavours in the service of those lam bound to honour, and constrained to love/* He paused, and a silence©f some moments ensued, that was distressing to Margiana, as it immediately followed the strongest er- ftre&sion he bad ever made use of to her i* 0 Her
Her desire to be gone returned more ear¬ nestly than before. While their conversa¬ tion lasted, they had been walking up and down the aisle of the chapel ,* and nov\, as they were turning near the aldr, s-i.c thought she perceived an inequality on the surface of the wall, that made her hope a private door had est aped her ob*crv;.ii',n before. vShe remarked it to Kthelred ; and. upon examining the place, they found <\e was right; but it did not appear *o ha\c been lately opened, znd adhered u>ik,seiy to the frame-work* that for some time their unifedefiprts proved inefiectual to obtain a pas&age. At length, from decay and age, the door, wjyic^was. little more than a slight oannel gav- way, b) breaking 1^1 their hands, (( I think," said Fthelred, ( * Clara's v.nle h likely to p^ove the greatest sufferer bv this ad\enti.re ; fov if we ha\c many such doors to force open, he will not know hk own house again when he returns," ,, ; x * Besides,
f( Besides, I fear," replied Margiana, u wc shall not benefit much by our prowess. All beyond seems void and darkness, nor do I Know what part of the house this will leacl uu to, if, indeed, it leads any whither, i wi>!i Clara, who you say was the first deviser of this witty joke, had been here, for her pair-:, h,s.e;;d id' me." * l I air. much better pleased as it is," re- tur:.-.d Etlulred. , ts Hov/e\cr, since it is hard \ou should be longer punished for her fully,, if you will wait here, while I go for¬ ward. I will return to let you Know if there . "* h ;t load by which you may regain your own apartriK:ii." Mr.rgi«u;a thanked hi.n, but prefer¬ red following, to rpare him unnecessary trouble; and they advanced some paces, when Ethelred peiceived ihey had reached the ruot of a sEiiiica-c. They ascended toe steps, at tho top of which a <;luumeriui^ light appeared, admitted through a small window,
window, and by its assistance they es^ily proceeded along a narrow passage, with severed doors opening into it, one of the-n situated at thee\?reme Ciuh Th:»y were now both and equallv distressed, for they feared obtruding into an occupied room. 4t But why," said Kthelrc c\ after a pai ^e, '* why need wc be so considerate? Fhcy were all in a league against you, excepting Wallop ; and if we break into his chancer, 1 am sure he will forgive \ $. I will try this { ior at a venture/' He opened it, looked in, arc!*, seeing no person, advanced more resolutely. Casting his eves around, for there was sufficient moonlight in the room to discern every part cf it, he laughed, and said, " This is a termi¬ nation to our '•amble I did not at all expert, 1 find I have brought you Into thc chamber lord Widdrington told me this evening was set apart for myself; but I am very sure there
cating with the body of the house, where you will no longer be at a lo-s how to proceed." li "Ieie ii is," cried Margiana. " Here is an opposite door. 1 am \e\ y glad you have bien at no farther trouble/* On passing through the room, .^he found herself close to her own apartment, and, aj;ain thankuig Ethel;cr 1 for hib assistance, left him, n o.t pleased with her even than he had ever been befoie, though, from th^$ first of their acquaintance, he had felt as much respeci for her good sense as admira¬ tion of her beauty and the simple graces of her person. She had not been long in hed before she heard her father's voice at her door, in- quiiing if jhewasfcafc. lie had been to the chapel, and, not i.nding her there, became too uneasy to refat, until he knew where
where she was. She told him how she h;ul escaped. " Well/' said he, " you ha\e extricated youiself so dexterously, I will never ioin in a plot against you again; unJ, I dare say, Clara has been too little pitched with the event of this, to attempt another soon," Then, bidding her a good night, lie kit her to Lev repose.
CHAP.
CHAI\ IX. 1 '' InutUzs Fidelity — A Bull and a Bractht, Tu;- additjona] society of Ethelred Win fcurq? r^nd Harold Wallop rendered the little party at Edgehill more agreeable to all its former members than it had been before. To Lady Rothes it alibrded what* next to admiration^ ehe lovee! best—amusement and variety. Lord Widdiiiugton. was delighted to see bis daughter and his nephew continually thrown in the way of each other; and Margiana became daily as partial to Wal¬ lop's conversation as Clara to Hundred's person, But Clara's partiality was very dhTerent iu ks nature from that of Margianai She
love; Margiana was not, nor haihoured for either of there young men a sentiment ap¬ proaching to that passion. The extreme plainness of the one rendered him unlikely to inspire it; and though the exterior ad¬ vantages of the o;i*en were such as rarely met the eye, and } 'argiana was duly sensible of h ; s more estimable qualities, yet her af¬ fections continued free $.-.and she wondered she had ever been afraid-of feeling too de* rkled a preference for her cousin. In answer to the praises Lord Widdring¬ ton freeJy and frequently bestowed on him, When conversing with her, she would readily acknowledge his merits— " But I cannot/' said she, *' consider him in any other light than that of a brother; and if I thought Ckua as deserving of him as she appears r r "irhc;\ I could, with unfeigned satisfac¬ tion, be a witness of their union. 1 wish, v ith ;»!! my heart, he might in time become partial to Genevieve, and she to him ; and J am
I am surprised he has never mentioned her with particular praise since he has seen her at Windsor." t( I do not partake your surprise at all/* Lord Widdrington spid, " Genevieve, no doubt, has a considerable degree of beauty ; but then she is a mere beauty; and what Ethelred admires in a woman are, sense?- spirit, animation, and judgment. Where* can he find all these in so great a degree as in her who, 1 believe, entirely possesses his heart?" ' ' f ' " <{ I hope not, my derx father," replied Margiana. u His affections are too valuaofe to be cast away on one who has nothing but friendship to givr him in return; and I should be blamable indeed, to think of being his, e^sn should he renew his father's proposal, whilst my*heart continued silent.'* " But if your head speaks in hi? favour/' interrupted lord Widdriugten, " that is, if yotf esicen; him as he dcivrves to be esteemed, is uot that sufficient Tor a ,.. .:' - woman r"
, ".There is no saying whether it would be sufficient for a ^m,ille ma.}," returned Margiana ; -did .she thought of her mother's ad\ i ce— * : n cver m ar r, u hell}- f or 1 ov e, b u t s v .c\er marry without i^,/' , Ethelred had not been long at Edgehill before he opened his whole heart to his .,uncle» vbo found him to be at once so strongly, and so rationally attached, that he became more anxious than ever for his success, and lamented A Margiana's i«dli;cr- .ence J# whilc> from this knowledge of her character, ho j;a\ejiihclred his advice how to overcome it. Ile.Tecomniended him to beware of pre- <ipitation, and by no mj^ns to address her Li.til he had some reasonable ground* for hoping he had created an interest in her hci.rt; and lady Rothes co-operated, by fcont/Jvlng a t tiioutciml opportunities of throvin» them together, to the extreme vexation of Cuua ("js'les, who bitterly re* grcttcd
of Lady Rothes's removal to Edgehill. Whenever it was in her power, she fas¬ tened rcrseirupon Margiana, to prevent the possibility of her conversing with Ethelred alone; and though Margiana was some¬ times tired of her, and always laughed at her motive, which was too obvious to escape any person's notice, vet, as she reallv had no wish that Ethelred might become more particular u\ his behaviour towards her than towards Ciara herself, but, on the contrary, would have shrunk from his ad¬ dresses, she had but a slight inconvenience to endure; while Clara, \sho was a serious sufierer, was unable, or pei haps did not even strive, to eonceal what was passing in her bosom. " Now, were I in love," thought Mar¬ giana, ** perhaps I might mak** myself as ridiculous as this girl."
While
. While Margiana, however, only laughed, Ethelred was importuned, and HarolJ out of all patience. So fervent was he in his friendship for\Vinburne,and his admiration of his co.ustn, that their union was the first wish of his heart; and he almost bated Clara, .whom be might otherwise have tolerably,liked, .lur having an opposite interest; and almost loved Lady Rothes, whom he certainly would otherwise have bated, because she did her utmost to pro¬ mote iti • ■ ■'■ But if he wasprovoked at Clara for liking hisfiiend too well, he was equally so at Margiana for not liking him sufficiently. " 1 rannot," he once said to her, (t 1 can¬ not reconcile your torpid indifference with vour other qualities. Kthelred, in half this time, mtjfht Lave turned the head of any woman but ^ om .elf. Cut yon have no horu-t that ir u vfain. There is no enduring you.*' " I did
u I did not know/* replied Margiana, laughing, " it was necessary to ha\e one's brad turned, in order to become an endur¬ able object, in your opinion. But, since it k so, why, instead of reproaching me for what I cannot help, do not v; u turn your aitcntion to Clara Castles, and commend her for shewing a sensibility nature has denied me r" " Because J^he is a presumptuous little creature for daring fo raise her eves to such s young man a<< Ethelred Winburne; vxwd s!'^ must be insane not to perceive that far fiom engaging his regard, she is only in- Miring his contempt/' " And that is a sentiment, Wallop, which in t\ic minds of men is so naturally excited 1;\ low in ns, that were I to act as Clara docs, I should fee! assured of insoirins the fc ~ame degree of scorn, though it might not be exprcised." " i wish \ou would try," said Wallop. f * Trv to become an objet t of contempt ? and
a.nd this from you, who pretend to be my friend!" " To be sure 1 I am more a friend to you than you are to yourself. The case of that foolish girl is widely different from what vouris would be, for you he loves, and her he does not. Besides, the voice of duty imperiously calls upon you to gi\e him a place in your aficctions; and it will be wickedness in you to deny it him ; for, after what has passed between Lord Wid¬ drington and his brother, and what you have heard of Bertram's character, you must be well convinced nothing short of a marriage between their children can ever effect a reconciliation between them¬ selves/' " I would not hesitate to expiate my father's rashness/' said Margiana, (i by any other penance; but certainly you are un¬ just, when you wish me punished for my uncle's hardness of heart/' "lam sine }ou dt&erw: punishing foi the
the hardness of your own. But I maintain, that becoming Llhelrcd's wife, so far from proving a penance, would be a reward equi¬ valent even to your deserts/' l< Oh, you are trying to make me amends now for your pa^t it ci\ t!it\ r , I find. A few minutes ago I was intolerable. But to con- •\\o.ce you that my opinion of Ethelred is not inferior to your own, I will assure you ^othin:r would make me happxr than his marry in u: my sifter, by which means the reconciliation so earnestly to be wished for would be as much promoted as by his union with imsclf.'* " Aye." answered Wallop; " but if J am not considerably mistaken, it would be even tjip most dHf'euU union lr* < Ifect of the two, {- \\,r present case, of tvn persons, one i- rd.vM.ly well ii'rlivd; in the other, T .O'pvh'v -w^cci both would be aveisc/* '* 1 h'j r .. tv>( \\\w you should think so " i ] lie I * :n"„>iann. *• When f last left my ,'^ t. **t h , I not 3°en hiheirtd , and fro<n iiie bttle she Udh known ol him i>ince, it is '. o i, "i ven
very unlikely she can have conceived any prejudice against him." " All that, 1 admit, my dear lady; but it is not impossible she may have conceived a prejudice in favour of another/' " Another ! who can you allude to ? I never had reason to believe Genevieve at¬ tached to any person bevond the members of her own family." " That was whilst she knew onlv her own family ; but when you left London, you will recollect she attended Queen Isabella to Windsor, and there the Princesses insisted on bringing hei occasionally into public. She had then opportunities of seeing differ¬ ent persons, and judging of them according to her own fancy." " Bnt you yourself, Wallop, teh Windsor very soon after. In that short space of time, my sister could scarce become suffi¬ ciently acquainted with any one, to form even th<i most transient attachment/' '' I beg your pardon for that. The same sensibility in which )ou are so lamentably deficient, 5
deficient, the gentle Genevieve may abound with; and the affair of Latimer forwarded intimacv most surprisingly." "GoodHeavens, Wallop, you alarm me! Can Lord Lothian------Is it possible he is the person you hint at ? Jt ** Even so> 1 assure yon. I never saw any thing like it, to be only the growth of a few days. Perpetually together, when she was not confined by her attendance on the Queen ; whether walking, or iu the circle, 3iL j \er asunder; glances stolen, lips whis¬ pering : every body noticed it as well as I; and I resolved to give you an intimati on of the affair, that you might bestow a little good advice upon your sister, who, though she seems to want it much, is too fine a creature to be wasted on an idle boy like Lothian.** Wallop here ceased. He saw Margiana was seriously affected by what he had said, " indeed," returned she, <c I never ex«. M $ pected
peeled this; and few things could have hurt me more. It is astonishing that Gene- \icve, who is the gentlest of human beinirs, could be plensed with the idle rnttle and noisv manners of a man like Lord Lothian. I do not I vow iv.y sister by the description you £tve." " Oh 1 i* is fine talkino;," oied W&llop. tJ Prudence iu a sweet fiouri^hins: plmt in the (.hade, but the similar of ton withers it; ami it seldo-n prows to be a timber tree as it has done with you. Kmve\er, f:.ke vour own measures. Von ran write to her. ?>he will probabh be ingenuousw.tli you ; aud il her ieaard for him still exists, forexi&t it certainlv did, there is no viable reason why she should not own U to you, who haung ,o constantly refubed him, she cannot fear ns a ri\al. I shall be Nendinj; a mc^engcr to Lord Percy, on harness, to-morrow; and he will take charge of any thing you chase to trufat to his care/' Margiana returned many acknowledge¬ ments
ments to Wallop for his friendship; and, without thinUeg it it present necessary to coir inunii ate iiis intelligence to her father, who, the hebevd, Mould lament suth in- f<\tui\: on as mmh as herself, sre* wrote a letter toGencvic\e. wherein, wirhout com¬ mit tin«» Wallop ns an informer, she men- tin: ed rUe report that had reached her, and, in \ei\ 5-tromr terms, expressed her wish that it iri»ht not be founded on truth. Th.s dispatched, she endeavoured to make fnr^lf easv until the return of themes- scngct; aud still could not help consi¬ dering it as one of the most improbable ol all human event?, that the modest, timid (leneweve should so suddenly admire a licentious youth of Lord Lothian's descrip¬ tion. But though Margiana partly subdued her anxiety for her sister, the apprehension she felt on the .store of her lather continued in full force. His attachment to Lady Rothes could not augment, but it did not diminish; m J and
and aftei Lord Rothfcs had been some months dead, and the time advanced when r/ts widow, without greatly violating thr? laws of decency, mi#ht make a second thoice, Mar&iana became nr-ote and more fearful of her sullying the name of Wid¬ drington with disgrace. Another circum¬ stance strengthened her opinion and her iregret. It seemed probable that, before long, Lady .Rothes would give birth to*a being, whose descent must, at the best, be very equivocal. Ethelred, who, sharing her sentiments. deeply felt her utieasine% lather created than took an opportunity of endeavouring to remove its cause, by giving his uncle a iust idea of the woman who had so charmed him. Once, when they were alone, he led the conversation to Lord Latimer's death, and said he feared it had been a conse¬ quence of the hasty words he had inter¬ changed with Lord Lothian on the subject pf &croope's affair, when, iq the madness
of his rage and jealousy, he had wounded Lord Rothes. IMs uncle, with a calmness he believed assumed, asked him what he alluded to * and Ethelred, in the simplest and least ex¬ aggerating terms, related the adventure. He perceived Lord Widdrington's colour change, but whether from anger, shame, or mortification, he was not able to guess, lie continued silent some minutes after his nephew ceased speaking, and Etheked fear¬ ed he had given offence. He apprehended it still mere whea Lord Widdrington, break¬ ing his pause, coolly said, " I do not doubt, Winburne, you have been told all this, and J as little doubt your belief of it Such tales, however, ought not to be spread ; and you might have spared yourself the pains of relating this to me. I am not a man likely to forget that 1 have two daugh¬ ters, who are deserving young women, and who look up to me for protection, and for their present happiness/' m4 He
a.iif tiw rtcd I.iPcbtd, vvi.o immc^ri'tb. r u;'i'i| * «;u;,:*<pa. nrd ..uqu linted hir vw?n v, hat had p-i.'^rd She ex preyed a lived \ ^en ' t#f I.fs «« f ^ iutentio!!?. ?mI f*-i( i*:n^ i^M' that tfan n\,'idd be atto-ded with th'* mo:t de&srai-'c result.—'* But, however,' t,a.d : he, " let the event prove what it mav, v on have done vour utmost to render it favoviabre to my father & future happiness and honr nr; and if he should fatally sarnike them bo.h to his unfortunate pavdon, no one but hnn- Kelf will be to blame; and I shall ne^er forget the service you have tried to render him." She held out her hand to Ethelred .is she spoke thus, and be, aflectionatib pr^ 'i ;^ it, made some rcrlv, but in a \os<i •* agitated and ^Khatinct, that she f*v.-e .*' reverting to a tu.jjeci she never t u:^ ol without Teorcf. Pleading, then fu v in engage mcit to attet d J.ady I:^*u. i^e icit hiiu; ai-u iic, reco\cnng bu pr(.i.c:^e
of h:s uncle's advice, and ruin his .own cau: ; e by imprudent haste. But a Very trifling accident, that happened some tinle alter, ei.f-relv overthrew his discreet reso* lutioti. A';.;g;.;:.a h*. i d remarkably fine long hair, o! a \i*l\ rnd j^iossv brown ; and though, v^iicn i.\i*i" *u-.ir tiie court, she was obliged th "", ..,, isuie to <ompl\ uith the fashion vi i ,v tj'.es, and conceal the greatest part i.j n !;.:.'■ , >'ur hea<bi)re c s, yet at Edgehill, wn.rc ; v as unner.e&sary to submit to in- roi;^tiiit*t f^rms, she no otherwise re- s.:r..:i s ed *r^ hixuriousnets than bv fastening it up in [i knot, or confining it h\ a u.nj-. - tint One ciav, as si>e w;*s sin ing in the g'U'wt'i v.,; : i i'ie rest of the hrtle partv, the k:.( t t;ru tied It up gave w:i\, and, wbil?t t- 1 :e -. -s r:---"b;i;.f .*, if. the vot.nif i.:rn took ro: t-e i • : Icnufh r:d br;i;,:\.—" f ut«- <-• r von f J ;vi!d v c\**r :' /> long," ^?i^l Cl.^vr!. -im:.r ,l v: v »,-• b:c?ome. My he^i *^ 5 wuuM
WoxM be in a perpetual fe#er, if f carried 3hal£a»Enuch/' ** It might »<&t be atnfes to try/' said Wallop, ssrchfy^ ** h&tig hair is heavy, and wouldno^makeb^d ballast/' u No more it would/' replied Clara, with good-humour; " but if mine, like Margi- ana%/sh4ttld happen to break bounds in a high^ind^ what wou3d%ecomeof me? for I dare sa^r, Wallfcp, you think I carry sail enough'a!ready/ ? Margiana observed, that her hair just then was longer than usual—" because/' said she, " my sister sometime ago desired me to weave her a bracelet of it, and I am preserving it for that purpose/' * f You may weave your bracelet as soon as you please/' said Lady Kothes; "your harr is quite long enough now/' " It is; yet I must wait till I return to London, for I have not a pattern one here to do it by; and some modes of weaving hair will make the bracelet more doable than others/' " I fear
" I fear I. shall be laughed at/' cri^j Ethelred, (( if I own that I have om by tne i and it is at your service, cousin, if it cair be useful. Arlette, when I leftfWiddringtoii Tower, thinking I should 'certainty visit London, where such things are best done, before I saw her again,' desired I would have some of my own hair wove into a bracelet for her; and x by chance oy mis* take, I find I have brought it here. I will fetch it, and if you like the pattern, keep it as long as you ^chuse," . ' He went into the house, and presently brought it back. It was very neat, and Margiana said she would thankfully borrow it, till she had finished her own. No more waa said on the subject At night, when she retired, she took the brace¬ let with her, and laid it in a little closet, in a corner of her apartment, where she be¬ lieved it perfectly safe.
m 6
The
The next morning, a fine sunrise' tempt¬ ed her to walk,sooner than Usual; and she rambled into the wood, finding it wanted near an hour of the time when they usually bmkfasted* On her return, going into her room to compose her dress, which had been milled by the wind, she happened to look into thc closet, and found that Ethelred's bracelet was no longer there. Certain of ^ the place where she had laid it the night before, she wa& very much surprised, ytt for some time sought for it; i>i\\ at bsf, finding her search vain, co.n-luded tlut cither Lady Roihes or Clara Cables had been there during her absence, and had concealed it, to teazc her. Clara's formerly mediated joke rendered it not improbable; and she immediately went to her, and en¬ deavoured to bring her to a confession. But Clara seriously protested s»he iwd not been in her room, and had ne\cr seen ihe braceletbince the precedingevemng. Lady Kothes, on being applied to, made the same declaration ; and Margiana knew not what to
or Wallop, and Ethelred himself least of alb She was constrained, therefore, publicly to acknowledge to her' cousin, at breakfast, that the bracelet she had borrowed of hint was for the present lost. " I kid it," said she, " last night, in a safe place, as It hough t, and left it (here thi^ morning when I went out to walk. When I came back, it was ^one. Lvidy Rothes- and Clara assure me they hd\e not removed it. This is very st.ange; but it is all I know of the affair, and 1 cannot account for - it. Since 1 had )our lca\e to keep it some time, I might have concealed the circumstance, in hopes of its being found in the meanwhile; but tt is best to tell you the truth, fori could not have been happy under tne concealment oi' touch an accident." Ethelred assured her the bracelet was a Iriiie not worth a moment's thought, aud that if it was never found again, the kss was of no consideration wnatevcr. Lut , • he
strAJCtiefn \xpm tlie' ^h%ir widely #ifFerent from the ti"Ufhv He MieVedf Margiana did not wish theism hisHatt*, and wronged her hy siispeeting lier ®f a species of pride she i?e^ly did not possess—that pride which forbids the acknowledgment of arrhonest ^nd modest Reference. As soohasbreakf^st was over, he walked out with Wallop/and found him partly of the sarni^ opinismwith himself.—" Yet I should not have suspected Margiana of such conduct/' said Harold, i( It may be mo¬ desty. With all mv heart! Modesty let it be. However, it lowers her in my opinion. If she likes you, what a deuce ails her she cannot shew it^ since she must see you are restrained from speaking only by the fear of giving offence? And if she does not, why doesshe turn thief for such a bawble?" * ( Oh, n© matter for that/* cried Ethelred; " so she does but wish to keer^i^ i care fo# nothing, m&m*": " That
u That may be, because yoft tm a lover; and a man in love is never in hi$ wits also. But if, in the end, it appears Margiana has done this, I shall be more vesedat ber con¬ duct than pleased to find you so much tn her favour. Yet I shall be very much pleased at that too/* * * f( Then you will be pleased either way/' said Ethelred, smiling. " B&t it can only be one way. Oh> 1 am sure she has it. I am sure she coloured when she told the story. I never was so happy in my life/' Wallop was not quite convinced yet; so the two friends returned into the house in different opinions; and the next morning Ethelred took care to observe Margiana when she went out, as. she usually did, be* fore breakfast, and went with her. For some time he talked on indifferent subjects. At length— ff I am going/' said he, u to write to my father. I wish I had any good news to send him/* " What
. " What fiews wot/d \ou send him bet¬ ter than you can send him ? Is not the King firmly seated on his throne ? and are not all the southern. pro\inc*-s hi tran- qi/illity r" " I am not quite sure e\oi^ of that. But I did not mean good nomunl newi." '* What sort oi news then f" " Good domestic news. For instance, If I told him I vsas happy, he would be glad to hear of it/' "And are ycu not happyr' J '?id i/ar- fiiara, not in the Itatt awaie of what he \u 5 leading to. " What is it can disturb \ou ?" Am' she thought of her fatm: rand her sister, and feared he might be appused of som-j un^ieasitit circumstance respecting one of then', which she wa^ still a .stranger to. '• W hat is It distujbs you ?'' repeated sh;', finding he did not answer her. " My attathiiicnt, Ladv Mi.rgiana, to a woman as excellent as she h lovely ; but, 1 fear, as cold as she Is excellent. Itro >gly p tpossc&scd in her favour, befoielescr aw her,
her, 1 have loved her since the day we ft t met, and I Jc\e her every hour m< io *.«:d more, If I know mv own hea r f, it ^>L ne\er disiinguish anothf r. While I bei eve sura a woman indiiferert tnwnrds n^e r while 1 am hojxless of c\ir obiaming h,M' hand, and still preserve my present sentiments, how can I be happy ? ,J "Make a slight change in thnhe senti¬ ments, Ethelred. Fancy yourself her bro¬ ther; continue her friend; and diop the romance of love/' " You give me prudent advice, my dear¬ est Margiana ; but, unfortunately, it is im¬ practicable. If you was not unconscious of your own merits, you would know it was so. Ask any other person, and they will say it is not so easy to cease loving you as you imagine. It is not in my power to feign a passion I never felt before. I had rather receive ^oier hand, t!k.n that of a sovereign princess." <( I am very much obliged to you for your preference," said JMargiana, <: and hav'„
'b\eno reason to doubt your sincerity; wit j,——™ * f Oh, do not answer mc matK 1 cannot be answered yet. Allow me to see you to* morrow morning ; and. in the meantime, cor&ider that if you will complete my hap- pin ess, by trusting to r, e your own, I will cherish it as 1 would my hopes of a better •world/' She would have replied, but he prevented her.-r—" Pray," sard he, " suffer me to be this day in suspense. If your answer is favourable, I shall be richly repaid for it; if it is not, I shall hear it too soon. Your acceptance would give delight to all our family. Your rejection must condemn me to a sir»|/e life, for to no other will I ever 4 say what I have said to you/* As they were now near the house, he left her as he uttered this, without giving her the opportunity of speaking another word, and turned back towards the wood, where he continued some time; while Margiana, going
going in, %vas met by Wallop, with a letter in his hand, which he presented to her, tell¬ ing her the messenger he had sent to Lord Percy was just returned., and had brought it from her sister. On retiring to her own room to read it, she found the contents such as a (forded her entire satisfaction. Genevieve gave her* the strongest assurances, that though she was occasionally amused by Lord Lothian's gaiety and odd vein of humour, he pos¬ sessed no share in her affections, and never, in the most distant manner,had endeavoured to engage them. She did not deny that during the first week of their acquaintance, his behaviour towards her had been par¬ ticular, but believed it might be wholly attributed to the advantage of novelty, that recommended her to his notice, and to the pleasure he felt in talking to her of her sister. She concluded by protesting, that even in case Lord Lothian, overcoming his present attachment, should in future direct his
his views to herself, her sentiments must undergo an entire change, before she could feel disposed io aiiordhim ihe le:i;t encou- ra ge m e n t. A n d 111 ese asr e \ e i u i i o n s w e re . i : o seriously cxpres-r;l, that ^ombif:it:g with *% *:»rgi ;\ na s know 1 et!ge of ("ju. t\ ie\ e s art- less c he ra c ter, she fe 11 co m p! c t e 1 y re• assu r- ed; and forgot, in the satisfaction this letter a Horded her, the pain fid t^k she had to perform cf mortifying Ethelred by a refusal of his address. ' f For how," thought she, " can I honourably accept of if, while he is no dearer to me than Wallop, or than any other person equally esteemable would be ? Flow can I promise him an affection I believe in my conscience I shall never feel ? Would to Heaven he had fallen in love with Genevieve!" She now went down into the hall, where she found every body at breakfast, ex< ept- ing Kthelred, who was still out. Wallop, who believed she had been walking with him, examined her countenance; but, from its
MARGIANA. its calm expression, could discover nothing of what he wanted to know. He at once. wished her to become favourable to the solicitations of his friend, and to prove un¬ concerned in thc theft of the bracelet, lie was sorry to < b.;crve iha' Kthelred^ appear-' an re, shortly after, occasioned in her no discomposure; and, parti.il as he was to him, he thought her indinference astonish¬ ing. Jr. the course of the morning, having an orport unify of speaking to Wallop alone, > r ar'»iana shewed him her sister's letter, and told him she could not harbour a doubt of the ingenuousness that dictated it. He lead ii verv attcntiwlvj and returned it without speaking. " Are }ou net satisfied ?" said she. " Your vkikc looks more like incredulity than con\iction ; vet can you believe my sLter would or could have written thus, iirainst thc feelings of her heart?" " I will
chuse/* replied Wallop. *' Is-it possible you should find any diffi- cuUv in belie^ ing this ? You must suppose Genevieve the greatest hypocrite, unne¬ cessarily, that everlhed; for why, if she really liked Lothiau, should she conceal her partiality from me,who certainly never mean to favour his pretensions myself?" " It is impossible to say why ladies do many things. Very few of them resemble you, who neither need nor wish to disguise any of your sentiments. But I shall be able to judge better by-and-by, for my messen¬ ger brings me orders from the King that oblige me to set out for London to-morrow .morning; and, with your permission, after I have had an opportunity of making my observations, I will write to you ; happy if I have reason to own I have been mis¬ taken/' *' To morrow/' said Margiana, ff do you Ictve us ? I am very sorry for it. We shall luue a great loss of you/' (( Oh
*< Oh vcs! irreparable. However,Ethelred will stay ; and if you would but learn to think like other people, vou would find his society ver) good amends for the want of mine/' €i Hue he comes," replied she; "and as you may ha\e a good deal to say to him before \ our departure, I will take my k*i\e, iind write an answer to my sister, which )ou will be so obliging as to carry to her." " Farewell! fair indifferent," cried Wal¬ lop, a:, she left the room, " Perfect in even other particular, you must have esca¬ ped out of Nature's hands before she had infused into your composition that share of sensibility usually found in human beings! I hogin now to wish \ou had the bracelet; but you ne\er stole such a thing in your lilt." Ethelred entered as he spoke.— '* You are in a hopetul way now, mil)," cried Wallop. " Your mistress leaves the room as yv\x t ome into
into ir. Oh, she must have secreted your bracelet! It can have disappeared no other way." ''Laugh as you please: but I consider her avoiding mc just now as no bad omen. Perhaps you do not know 1 spoke to her this morning." <> What did you speak to her about ?" " How can vou ask such a question > I repeated the offer, to be sure, that was made bv mv father some time ago." " « Why, then you will receive the same answer your father did. Yon have been too hasty; you have too easily flattered vourself. She would no mere steal a lock of your hair than she would steal }o\±r purse. She is both too ingenuous and tco insensible." That same evening, to Ethelred\, :;'e;,t discomfiture, proved Wallop right. There was a pleasant walk exter.dinc? about two miles from Edgehill, acrosc the
Margiana and Clara Castles often went, to drink new milk. On their preparing to go this evening, Wallop, as it would be the last of his stay, wished to accompany thern, and Ethelred went also. Lady Rothes de¬ clined walking so far, and LordWiddrington staid with her. On their road to the farm, the four young people kept together; but as they were returning, Clara's contrivances were so suc¬ cessful, that she and Ethelred found then> selves in a large pasture-ground, near a quarter of a mile before Margiana and Wallop, who, as usual, was haranguing and half-scolding his fair companion, on the subject of his friend. While he was thus engaged, a loud shriek made them both lift up their eyes, and they beheld Clara Castles, at thefurther end of the field, running with the utmost swiftness from a'huge bull, that Ethelred was endeavouring, by every means in his power, to provoke from pursuing her. vos„ i. N gut
attack a flying foe than one who braved his fury, paid little attention to Ethelred, -md gained so rapidly on the terrified Clara, that , it was with the most extreme difficulty, and %vith exhausted breath, sheireached a stile, over which she threw herself with such pre¬ cipitation, that she fell on the opposite side, into the adjoining Pcld. Ethelred, to avcid the bulb that was attempting to follow U r, forced hh way through the fence, a few paces below the stile, and immediately running to her, found her quite insensible from terror, and unable to take any further measures for her own safety. He therefore lifted her up; and as she was of shoit stature and slight make, he easily carried her through a gateway on one side of the pasture they were now in, where he knew she would be entirely out of danger, and where Margiana and Wallop, by a circuitous road soort joined them, but before Clara had recovered her senses. To effect her restoration, Wallop brought some water m his
5
Ki&hand from the neighbouring brook, and Margiana, to give her freer respiration, opened the dress that confined her neck and throat. She had no sooner done so than Clara, though her eyes were still closed, made a slight movement, turning rather to one side; when, from her bosom, forth fell Ethelred's bracelet 1 It lay on the grass, visible to them all. t The young men looked at one another, and Margiana blush¬ ed for shame, as if the detection reflected on herself. With immediate presence of mind, and to snare Clara's future confusion, she caught it up, and held it out with one hand to Ethelred, while with the other she- pressed her finger to her lip. He took it, and bowed in silence. Clara now seemed coming to herself, and Margiana hastily arranged her dress, as it was before; so that it was never known to the fair pilferer how she lost her stolen trea¬ sure. She supposed she had dropped it, when running across the pasture to* the stile. / k2 A few
lyalk home. Though still much agitated> slie did not think the way long, for Ethelred supported her with, his arm; and she relai ^d the adventure lo Lady Rothes, with the warmest expressions of gratitude for the assistance he had afforded her; whileWallop, "with a tragic-comic rage, that, notwith¬ standing all her endeavours to the contrary, excited Margiana's smiles, abused her for daring to be guilty of a paltry trick, that had subjected to suspicion one so much her superior. With difficulty Margiana re¬ strained his observations from ihe hearing of Lady Rothes and even Clara herself. The little party sat down to supper, in spirits much less cheerful than oidinary, Bthelred was mortified and dejected; every one lamented the good-natured Wallop's d£par*uve, and he himself thought of it with regret, Though he was. noti m lo,ve with JHIajgiana, it was pain aud trouble to him to leave fast} and she, over aad:above the* vexation
his ii iendly society, could not call to mind, > without considerable uneasiness, the answer she was bound to give Ethelred the next morning. The idea of it kept her awake half the night — f< What a pity he should ever have fancied me \" said she to herself. * f What a friend, what a brother, what a companion, he would make ! I wish I could like him well enough to marrv him ; but all my e(Torts to do so are in vain. I had rather iive with my father to the end of my days/' She turned over in her mimL a hundred ways, the expressions that she fancied would moM gently convey to him her refusal. Once she thought of begging her father to speak for her; but he was Ethelred's friend/ and she would have arguments to contend with, though from the authority of so affec¬ tionate a parent she had nothing 1 to fear, Ihen Wallop's intervention occurred to- her; but he was still move partial, andi. '■■ •• '* n3 would
with any message unfavourable to the fsiond. he almost idolized. At length, to save herself the pain of a personal inter-. view, and at the same time avoid troubling smy one else, she determined to write her answer; and, as soon as it was light, she arose for that purpose. After some alter¬ ations, she expressed herself as follows:
f( So much is due to vou from me for the attachment you profess, and you are so deserving of the best return that can be made to it, ihat I could with less diffi¬ culty tell you I accepted your proposal, if it was in my power to accept it at all, than I can now find words to express the neces¬ sity I am under of declining it; yet that 1 must do, injustice to yourself, for yon merit a whole heart, and a willing hand ; and ex¬ treme would be the reluctance which would accompany me to the altar. " While
<s While that reluctance lasts, I will de¬ ceive no man by promises of future attach¬ ment I may never be able to fulfil When I consulted my dear mother on a former address on this subject, she, knowing my averseness to any engagement, made use of these strong terms, by which I mean to re¬ gulate my actions for the time to come: ' If ever/ said she, * you form a predilec¬ tion for an estimable lover, marry him with¬ out fear; but wait until you do feel it; and if it never arises in your bosom, con¬ tinue Margiana Winburne, and live in peace/ " Suffer me, however, to entreat a con¬ tinuation ol your friendship, and to assure you of mine, and of the very high esteem in which I hold you. You shall always have the best wishes I can form, and the mou fervent pra)ers I can offer to Heaven for your happiness/*
Margiana
Margiana went below stairs after she had r wrote thus; and sitting down under the' porch before the door, she had not waited To tip when she saw I'thclred and Wallop at a little distance from the home. They no. sooner perceived her, than the former,, cutting his friend, came to her with mucht of anxiety in Irs fare. After exchanging a, frw wotds, she put her letter into hs hr.nJ, and then, len\ing him, hastened into the fnl?, where she found her father and Clara. titles, After the usual saTutation of the morning, she sat down in the window, without speak¬ ing. Lord Widdrington was reading; and Lady Rothes soon joined them. ** What r said she, " all silent ? But it is. m> wonder t I he loss of jour tame bear, Margiana, spreads a gloom over us alh Srppo^ you, who can bay any thing to him -without cfence, was? t-o desire him, as iocn as he reaches London, to send us down one of
He might accompany yon in your evening rambles, walk full as gracefully at your side ns Wallop has done, and dance rather- better/* " Do not ridicule Wallop," said Lord Widdrington. " It is turning excellence itself into derision." " I do not ridicule him. I believe he would esteem my comparison a compli¬ ment. But who can forbear a smile at his and Margiana's platonic, sentimental passion for each other ? Now, poor little Clara's case is of a different cast, and excites a tear and a sigh from every one," More conversation of this kind passed, as they began their breakfast, and it was only interrupted by the entrance of thc two friends, who both appeared considerably dejected, and spoke UttSIe till the party rose, to separate. Ethelred then addressing Lady Kothes, told her he found himself under th& painful necessity, of taking leave of her, with
WAHCTAVA.' vith iriiiny artcnow!rrVrmf*ntft for her p?st kindne-s and +.o?pitaIi t y, beiutj obl ; ^rd to a r cmunanv I T arobl Wallop tn T.on^cn. Then, turr.ir.r; to his uncle» he begged a few minutes in private with hi' v : and they went out, leaMn<r La^y llothes and Margiana a good deal?i rprised, particularly the former, \v' f o Knew not to what cause to attribute this sudden resolution ; and Clara endeavouring to suppress the tears that too readily sprang to her eyes. Margiana spoke toWallop; but he looked sullen, scarcely returned her an answer, and said he must go and order his horses out of the stable ,• " for where," ssid he, in a grumbling tone, " is the use of staying here?" He went out, and in a quarter of anhouv n turned wirhl.ord Wddrington and his nepbc ■• Etheked again paid his thanks to La*'.}' 'xthes, took a respectful leave of Clara, aM then approaching Margiana, who Iield out her band t ( > him, pr.e»<*nted to her a small parcel, wishing-her health and happi- KGSS*
tiess. She motioned to declir.? accepting ■what he offered h< «•; but Lord Widdrington, in a severer tr--ae than she bad ever heard him w before, :^id, " Take it, Margiana 1 . Jwilll-avo its-* *' t ^he obeyed; and Ethe.'r-d, wi.r^e cus "li-tcntd. ki^ed her hand, ^: -X turne \ from her. Wallop then, vvith a surly f?xc, took lea\e of Lady Kotiu^ and Clara ; but th'* e v nrc'Ns;on of his ila*uies entirely and iijsfjutly < banging when he advanced towar;K Marei '".a, he wrung her hand, arH wr'wg her r'lnost In tears, indiuint tlv exclainu'u, " Lc»s \ou, bless you ! there is no being an^rv with you." He then hurried after Ethelred ; and they both mounted their horses, and roue away, Kv.v- in;, a \ icancy at Edgv'i.ill, too* was fcii in various wa\s by everv one there.
end op vol. r,
l^ncj HarUntr, and Co, I.i-.i^^Siali-StiFiit,
