Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The haunted palace: or, The horrors of Ventoliene: a romance
ТИЕ
HAUNTED PALACE, OR The Horrors ofVeniolkne. ■*> ι *Λ»"ιΓι!'""'">*'^'- r f -ч J HR spectres advanced, and, in a few minutes, surrounded the pavilion. It is impossible to say whether the terrors of those within, or the horrors (/those without, were the greatest; both w ere terrible. Tbe fienels formed a circle round the trembling group, and, while the whole system of nature appeared convulsed by contending elements, the horrid phantoms per- Vol. II. В formed
musician, but поде was visible— rall \fa$ hushed and silent, save the music ; not evea a zephyr breathed* . HowVeiy differeet the scene Jiefo-r^ them ! They looked towards the pa~ kee ; the őre was extinguished, %anA the wild uproar of contending elements was changed to a dead and solemn- silence» The music again soundeel iu loftier strains, and the following words were distinctly pronounced : Why should mortals vainly dare Hidden roy stenes to clear f When the riniK'r'b ram-om*·- pajtí, Let his bones in du«t be laid At Bononi thou shalt mett Him that*» good and him that's great. From their hps intstrucUon take— Return, and search the waf ry İaku. Those words were listened to with the greatest attention» though to aU but
Imt^Öid party that yteittd : ìbe ruins ic wa$..4vhoHy uııhîteîligibJe^ ďhey drew from it an inference, that made them conclude they were not to make any more searches, till one or all had visit- ed Bononi. ТЫ strains ceased ; eaoh íookçd at the dfter, аз tfto enquire лпт ît fçamt } ^but thoStšwmt dia >u¿-_ derstand it made pç>farticufeır remarle Poor \ r ashri &ç€méâ t&\fimï the force of the words; the 'teroris she had un¬ dergone, and the sudden transition from them so far affected her, that sbe fainted away. Several successive fits followed ; her husband wa&distracted ; he blamed himself severely for ever going near the abominable chambers, as he called them ; he and Michael were firmly persuaded that their going- Jmd occasioned these dreadful storms, ana the visits of tho devils; for such they would have them to be.
ĽS
Father
ГлЬег Cfiegory was at hi A ruppr Mifugh to nitore t tie poor woman, itiifl ar»cví;»y thingappcauft calm, and the tire cxtinguishttd it tlie palace, the captain proposed going to examine %ilidt mischief had been done there, ľitzatlati and tììree others accompany¬ ing him, while father Gregory and the rest of the compati v regained in the Ι. v pavilion with Vashti and Michael, who was in a state of stupefaction, and whom thev endeavoured to make sen¬ sible that ali the danger was past, and they meant to return to the palace ; but not all tke rhetoric of father Gre¬ gory, or the persuasions of the rest of the company, could calm her fears, and ahe and Michael were in the same state when the captain and Fiteallan return¬ ed, to assure them that not the least damage had been done to the part of tbe dwelling where they resided. They therefore conjured her to resume her forti-
'fortitude, and return. Joseph, at last, prevailed with her, and, between them, they carried her in—poor Michael wa* obliged to be carried also. As soon as her husband had placed her upon the bed, father Gregory, who was at once their spiritual and bodily physician, ordered an opiate to be ad¬ ministered to both, that their senses might be lulled to rest, before they were again called into action, and, by that means, their reason would not run a risk of derangement. That done, they all assembled in the great room, where a long and interest¬ ing convention ensued, respecting the horrid sights they hael witnessed. Though most of them were in the dark, with respect to the warning, yet they could noc be persuaded but that some¬ thing more was meant than they coukl В 4- com-
coroprehend, and several times ex¬ pressed, a wish, that tht rest of the company bad been at home, or it had happened a few days before. They were certain something was meant by it; for, they saw the palace on fire, md the lightning burn up the grass and plants, and kill the dogs and the .sheep, and yet, now the sky was clear, there did not appear the least vestige of the devastation. They should there¬ fore desire father Gregory to draw up an account of it, antl, when the com¬ munity returned, to show it them, that something might be done to have it explained : fen* their parts, tliey baid. if ever tlu у were ίο witness such up¬ roar again, no inducement uneler hea- леп should pievail upon them to con¬ tinue there ; for, though every thing appeared as if nothing hael happened in the house, yet they were couviuced that
that such another scene would be the death of them. The captain, Joseph, Fitzallan, and fatiier G re oforv. thought as much them- svives, but eliei not say so; for other things engaged their attention. The captain recülleetee!, that the time was nt aiiy cNpirctl, when he was obligetl ro be 'Л H<;i:oni ; a circumstance that hael before ťscapcíl bim. líe imparted Jiis thoughts to the father and Fitzal¬ lan. anel said, that, as soon as he got to bis room, he would look into his pocket- book, anel see how long it was to the time. Further discourse passeei, aud the father, the captain, and Fitz¬ allan eliti not fail ta strengthen the terrors of their companions, and repre¬ sent to them how much better it would be for all of them to leave a place and away of" life, thut effectually prevented them from enjoying those domestic 13 S comforts,
comforts, uhích man is born to pos¬ sess ; but that* in the manner in whkh they lived, it was impossible to be otherwise than under continuai dread and anxiety, not only of the present, but the future. This discourse had the desired effect, and thev came to a resolution, as soon as the rest of the community returned, to make known their intentions of quitting the society. And another thing, they said, would urge them on to kave the place, which was, that they were convinced something diabo¬ lical had been done in the palace, pre¬ vious to their becoming inhabitants of it. Father Gregory joined them in the same opinion, and said that the care of their souls had been the only induce¬ ment for hím to continue among them so long as he had, and it was his most ardent wish, that, before he closed his eyes
eves forever, he should have the satis¬ faction of seeing the whole of them ι stored to their country, friends, and connexions. Thb point settled, they thought it proper. Införe they went to rest, togo and cx-miir.c e\ erv part of the building, that they might fic certain nothing was to be apprehended from fire. The four that kept watch requested four others to stay with them, as they could not gtt over thcir terrors ; and, though men who had frequently braved almost every danger, yet they shrunk at the idea of a^ain scemar the horrid sights thev had that dav witnessed. Wheu they had examined every place, and found all safe, father Gregory, the captain, Fitzallan, and Joseph, Arent tó rest—the remainder chose to sit up the night. The captain, before he retired, gave orders to be called at the least В 6 alarm ;
alarm ; father Gregory recomuieuded them to the care of Heaven, and then left them. When Fitzallan came to Iris apart- meut, be fouud Michael in a sound sleep. Tbe captain accompanied him ý for, as yet he liad not found the way to his room, or from it, without a guide. They dicouráüd a long time about what they had seen, and Fit zal¬ lan said, He wou'd u*. happy to know whether he should be obliged to go with him to Bononi. " It will be impossible for mc to i-ay/ - auswercd the captain, ** till the fu at part of the society returns, which will not be for some tlays, as they set oil for Naples only this morning. They will bring orders for the community, and father Gregory. He is a meni ber of tbe society at Borioni; and ; I believe, a very
very good mau. He appears in the great¬ est dangers always cool, collected and re¬ signed. II is mind seems unruffled by any adverse fate, antl, by uhat I have seen of him, since I have been here, Iris m hole intention is to make others us sensible of acting wrong as he is him¬ self, lie studies mankind u ith great accuracy, and plies hib instructions ac¬ cording to the temper anel habits of those to whom he diiects his liiscourse. ТЬоье that arc » % ..aicly virtuous, rever¬ ence and respect him. I know seve¬ ial af the community, who from his lessons have been brought to despise their way of life, and earnestly to wish for that period, when they sliall be able to return with credit to thcir fami¬ lies. The disguise they wear, when they are out upon any expedition, to¬ tally precludes all apprehensions of be¬ ing personally discovered; and, what¬ ever money bey ge^ at the gaming table.
table, or other articles which they pro* ciire, when there is any public calami¬ ty, or in their different excursions, they are obliged by thcir oaths to render a just account of; and, after the neces¬ sary disbursements, the remainder fun- less some particular bauble shoukl be desired by an individual) goes to the public account, which is settled once a month. They have, I think, pro¬ cured a great deal within the last six months, and. I believe, wlien the year is up, and they go to Bononi, it avi lì be found there is enough to settie a great many of the community. But, in this society, as well as in all others*, there are men, who, notwithstanding thev have had very liberal educations, and are by birth gentlemen, yet are so much addicted to vice and a licentious way of life, that all reasoning, and even the dread of punishment here¬ after, cannot wean tliem from pursuits tnat
that seem interwoven with their natures. Such a one was Owen.— " At the mention of his name, Fitz¬ allan hove a sigh. "And that man/' said he, * * was the husband of my sister î " "That you must forget/' said the captain, "and endeavour to erase hint írom your mind. He is now too sen- bible how dearly the gratification of г ver j vice is purchased. I have been informed by father Gregory that there are two sets of members in the society at Bononi ; the elders of one can com¬ mand the services of celestial spirits, inhabitants of the air; the ether set, those of the infernal regions. They both follow in all things the doctrines of Aïbatel, Dee, and others, whose magical principles are well known, and I think their aphorisms have been, and are now, not only believed, but fol¬ lowed
lowed by even princes. By what I eau к dm from father Gre^ory^ I bhall be at iiberrv to make m ν election into either of those parties, аш1 so will you, if tht y oblige you to become a mem¬ ber. I think I can not be at a loss to guess vhich vou will embrace, nor need I tell yon which Ishall make choice of, "A» I told you, I have piomibcd to be thereat the end of the twelve¬ month ; but whut to make of that clause whicii enjoins eaeh individual to pre¬ sent themselves, dead or alive, I know- not; it is beyond my compi thensiou» I cannot be brought to believe they have power over departed spirits, so as to oblige them to obey their commands ; and yet, .1 know not how to doubt fa¬ ther Gregory, who strongly asserts the truth ofit, saying that Every thing is to be obtained, if we religiously obey the rules laid down in the aphorism. A specimen of one I can shew you, in his
his own hand writing, which he gave mc about a month smce, when we happened to have some serious diicourse upon the subject It ie from an Isagoge of Arbateľs, but I believe this w but part of it ; the beginning I hnve »ct got—I think I returned it htm ; but you shall hear what I have now with me. n The captain opened his pocket book and read from a paper, "That even, as " there is one God, from whence wall " good, and one sin, to wit, Disobedi- " ence against the will of the com man· " ding God, from whence comes all " evil, so that the fear of God is the " beginning of all wisdom, and the " profit ofall magic. For, obedience " to the will of God followeth rhe fear " of God, and after this, followeth the " practice of God, and of the Holy " Spiril, and the ministry of the holy " angels,
" angels, and al! gomì things out of the 4 * inexhaustible treasures of (tod. But * * unprofitable mid damnable magic ari- ** seth from this; w hen we lose the "feai of God out of our hearts, and " suffer sin to reign in us there, the " Prince of this world, the Goti of this " workl beginneth anel setteth up his " kingdom, instead of holy things, ia such as he rlndeth profitable for his " kingdom there. Even as the spicier " taketh the fly which falleth into hi* " web, so Satan spreadeth abrt*ad his " nets, and taketh man with the snaics " ofcovetousnes-?, until he sucketh him ťť anei draweth him to eternal fire.— 6i These he cherisheth and advanceth " on high, that their fall may be the fi greater. Apply thine eyes to the " sacred and profane histories, and to " those things which thou seest daily " to be done in the work!, and thou "shalt find all things full of magic, " according
4Í according toa two-fold st ien ее, gooel il aml evil; which, that they may bc if the better discerned, we will put this li division and subdivision, For the con- il elusion of these Isagoges, whereia " everv one mav contemplate what is ťť to be followed; and what to be avoid- ťt ed ; and how far it is to be laboured ťť for by every one, to a competent end ťť of life and living. SC iE NC E S. GOOD. Knowledge ol' the wor-i of Go<f, and ruling one's lifti accorti ing to the word of God.—Knowledge of the Theosophy* -^ Government of God by angels, which the scripture callctb watch¬ men ; and to understand the mystery of angeb. Anihrosophif, f Knowledge of natural things.- —Wis- ¿■/Ví'/í (о тан. I dam in human things.
E V I h.
ËVlt, -Ctmtømgt 6Í the word øf Oo4 ) anti to Hvenfteľ lb «Ш of tíiet)eviL -*Igfîomm?# of tbe gororiHnent tke .custody ol* íwgeb, md tkat tbeiî ^ompôcioas are of tbe D«vî1» — Mobtry.-'-'Atbeism.
&№$$№№$'
kwml$$b öf poi*ons, a»a to iise tbeip*- 5 — Wisdom ítt-íÄl <а«1 arts, to Uie destruction of тал- Ыщ! ï »ttd to ше them in con¬ tempt of trod, -and for the loss and destruction of man.
"Thb к but a renman t/* said the cap¬ tain, " of what I have btfore seen ; however, It is enough totgiveyou an idea of the whole of what they profess ; but there is a great deal for you to be maele acquainted with, anel, to tell you the truth, I am led to think, that the dread¬ ful, scenes we have this day witnessed were certainly brought about by means of
of those agents, to serve some wise and good purpose, which, however, к not at. present to be made known to us, t I really began to tiiink, wheu the de¬ mons surrounded us İn the pavilion, that we were all in the power of the Devil, having done ¡something to offend his infernal worship. For the first time iu my life I felt fear ; though I am not by nature a coward, yet the dreadful warfare of the elements absolutely un¬ manned me. I shall never think of* the scene but with horror. " "Nor I/* said Fitzallan, who had listened -with the greatest attention to all the captain hael said ; "I am con¬ vinced that all we saw was caused by some supernatural agency ; but, whether through the commanda of Heaven, or the machinations of Hell, I know not. I must own I bhould like to be certain, and, if my becoming a mem-
ber at Bononi with you coukl clear up my doubts, I should not hesitate one moment to be so. How long will it be before you will be obliged to return ?*' * ζ Only a few weeks,'* said the cap¬ tain ; ' ŕ I should not have thought ît so near, had not this affair of to-day re¬ minded me of İt Several of this com¬ munity are members ; indeed, I believe the whole of them ; but I am ignorant of a great many particulars, as it re¬ quires three years to be novices. At the expiration of the first year, you make your election, antl at the end of the third, are allowed to act. J\ach candidate delivers in his pretentious to cither of the parties he makes choice of, either good or bad. If good, he must produce vouchers for all the services he has done, for the three years he has been initiating. If his conduct is ap¬ proved, and he is thought worthy, he is
L· invested with power to counteract, in conjunction with those spirits he can command, the diabolical schemes of the opposite party ; so that, though member^ of one community, they arc İn continual warfare with each other ; and those that can bring the most vo¬ taries at the end of the year, are allowed the supremacy for the one ensuing. I most earnestly hope, that our side oť the question w iil have it next }ear, und am more inclined to think so, as death has bwept a\tay seveial of the opposite members, two of which you know, Owen and St. Prie, and there are two others that were killed at Rome in a brothel. You must, therefore, prepare yourself to behold some disa¬ greeable sights ; but, I think, when a man is couscious of acting right, to the best of his abilities, he need not fear any thing. Our resolution may be staggered at first ; but recollection will
wilt in a moment re-assume the man, and enable u% stedfastly to behold ob¬ jects, that a guilty conscience would always shrink from. This is not alto¬ gether my own doctrine, but that of father Gregory, whom I sincerely be¬ lieve to be a very good man. He does not make any comments on the affair of the ruins—did not you observe that?" "Idid/* said Fitzallan ; "butthought his silence arose from the ignorance our companions were in, respecting it. " "True/' said the captain, "but I believe he had other reasons. I would not have you drop any hints before Michael of this discourse ; it is neees¬ sarv that he should not he made ac- quainted with it." Fitzallan promised, and they parted for
for the night. Edward could not sleep î a thousand thoughts crowded on his brain; he earnestly wished himself a- way, though, at the same moment, he was anxious to be acquainted with all he hael heard respecting Bononi ; but he saw there was no remedy, and he had conceived so strong an attachment to the captain, that he was certain he could not leave liim there, without feel¬ ing the most lively regret. Another thins: which reconciled him to his si- tuation, M'as the recollection that it was impossible for any one to leave the community, without the concurrence cf the whole, and he hael pledged his faith to the captain not to abuse the confidence he had reposed in him.—- After a variety of distressing thoughts he fell a sleep. The next morning, when fetched to breakfast, he found every thing had Vol. IL Ç remained
rnnained perfectly tranquil during the niglit ; and, though the company had kept the strictest watch, yet nothing had been seen or heart!. Vashti was very ill, and a fever was apprehended. Michael was still in a profound sleep, from which they thouglit it best not to wake him. Father Gregory adminis¬ tered what wars necessary, anel Joseph, who had watched over her during the night, assured him that she was pos¬ sessed with an idea, that she saw among the demons the figure of her mother ; and all he could say to her could not persuade her out of it. They were alarmed at this preposses¬ sion, as it might tend to destroy her rea¬ son. The father went to her, and found that what Joseph had said was true. She raved upon her unhappy mo¬ ther, and said she was certain she was among the damned. The good m в
tried to reason with /her, but reasoning was in vain, and all that he could do was to persuade her to take a composing draught, which lulled the senses into a kinel of' stupor. Her husband, who sincerely loved her, was nearly as bad as herself, from apprehensions of losing lier ; but, in a few hours, the poor fel¬ low hael the satisfaction of finding her composed, and he went to rest himself» lie had not long laiel down, liefore he was sent for to the park cu tran ce; a gentleman wanted him, the man said, whose turn İt was to keep that gate. The captain thouglit it best not to ha\c him elisturbeel. Saying He would go himself to see who it was. He took Fitzallan w ith'him-, and .went to the avenue ; hut what was his sur¬ prise aud astonishment, when he be¬ held in'the gentleman—his brother/ He instantly ran to him, anelembraceei С 52 hini,
him, with ail the warmth of fraternal love. The brother seemed happy, be¬ yond measure, to see htm again, and informed him he had been at the pa¬ lace the morning before he had got leave of the porter to see the ruins, and eame up to them just, at die moment a large part fell in. He saw no one but a woman, of whom he had asked Whe¬ ther any one was hurt ; but she ap¬ peared to be ignorant of any accident happening, and, from her he had en¬ quired after him ; but she said The captain was from home, and then passed on, and he was obliged to return without being able to see or get any intelligence respecting him. The captain introduced Fitzallan, and they all three returned to the pa¬ lace. His brother had no servant with him. When they ascended to the - portico, the count stopped to view tlie stately
stately ruins. He was struck with ad¬ miration at the scene, but appeared affected at its mouldering appearance. They descended to the great room, wiiere he was introduced to all the community then present, as well as to father Gregory. He then informed the captain That he had received a letter from the Prince of Bononi, which had induced him to come there, to see his brother on some business relative to their family anairs. Soon after, the father, Fitzallan, and the rest of * the company, left them, and went to visit Michael, whom they found awake and tolerably sensible. lie wished to see his master; they as¬ sured him he was saie, and would be with him soon ; but, at present, he was preparing something for him to take. Edward advanced towards him ; he had stopped, in order to bring it from fa- C 3 ther
ther Gregory's apartment. The poor fellow was overjoyed to see him in safety ; he talked in an incoherent manner of what had passed ; but the seeing him near him seemed to have the effect of a talisman. They agreed to continue witii him, as he was not fit to get up ; and they feared, if his mas¬ ter left him, he would relapse again into his fears. When the captain was alone with his brother, he expressed a wish to know by what means he had found out his place of residence, and what coukl in¬ duce him to venture there, unless he meant to Income a member of the so¬ ciety. "That I will tell you/' said the count ťt You may remember the day I left home ; but it is necessary you should know my reasons, though perhaps you are acquainted with them. "
The
The captain said No, he луаз not : he had onlv been led to conjecture, " Then İ will tell you/' said he. " You knew my attachment f о Mrs, Brisač, Before I left Nice, I made several attempts to inform her of my passion ; but every endeavour proved abortive, and I gave up the pursuit, fully determined, as soon as I came of age, to make such offers to her and her father, as I vainly thought would not fail of being accepted. In this deter¬ mination I continued, till the letter reached our preceptor from Mr Dain¬ ville, stating that his daughter had ob¬ tained a completion of her divorce.·—- The news drove me beside myself— One moment I was in raptures ; the next I dreaded every thing from a ri¬ val She was now at full liberty to make another choice. I had som* short time to pass btfore I \\иъ of age. С 4 I
I had to return to my father, and the doctor's invincible scruples to combat with. Every thing, I thought, con¬ spired against me. I conceived it best to throw oft 4 all disguise, and inform him of my love. You know the argu¬ ments he made use of, to correct what he termed my folly ; but all opposition was vain, I was deaf to every thing, and Unding that in him I coukl not obtain an advocate, I was determined to become my own. "The letter that called us so unex¬ pectedly home obliged me to have re¬ course to writing. I lost no time in declaring myself to Mr. Dainville, and requested his good offices for me with his daughter. To mention what offer·, I made would be superfluous ; let it suffice to say they were such, that no one besides those to whom they were addressed would have rejected. I wrote likewise
likewise a short note to Mrs Brisač, con¬ gratulating her on her emancipation ; gently hinted at the letter I had sent her father, and earnestly entreated she would honor me with a few lines in re¬ turn. Those letters I sent express ; answers to which, I did not receive till after my arrival at home. " I will not relate what I suffered, when I found my hopes effectually crushed. My offers were rejected, but I had the satisfaction to learn that it arose not from any preference given to a rival, but a determination in Mrs* Brisač never to marry again. I read them over and over a thousand times, and the more I read, the more I ad¬ mired the greatness of their souls, who could reject such offers as my warm imagination had suggested. Not sa¬ tisfied with tliis answer, I was detenu ί* ned ; as soon as my father was a little С 5 reco« с ileüj
reconciled to his loss, and 1 could with propriety leave him, to epiit home, and altogether resiele near the dwelling of Airs. Brisač. This plan was uo sooner formed, than I rcsolveei to adhere to it ; but, while I was waiting for the hour, when I could put it in practice, my fa¬ ther made the proposal of settling me. 44 You know the result of that conversation, antl what followed. As soon as I ge>t to my room, I called a council with Le Brun how I shoukl act. He ad vi seel me to collect what money I could immediately command, to give out I was ill, and he would take care no one shouiel come into my room, whilst Iset about packing up my papers, jewels, and whatever I should choose to take with me. You know the time we took to do this. "As soon as every thing was ready, he
he contrived to get my luggage out of the house. We set off immediately, and arriveel, without any obstacle, at Paris, where I was led to hope I should meet Mr. Dainville; but 'm this I wai disappointed. I left that place direct¬ ly for Nice, but had uot gone far од. my route, before I learnt by accident that they were at Turin. I reached it. and was not long before I had the |iap- piness of paying my respects ţo them. Li addition to their family, I met young I) tin vi lie and his wife, a very amiable woman. They had arriveel from the Lust Indies about a fortnight. In, a few days after this, arrived Mrs. Brt- sacb bisler, and her hubband, a veiy v orthy couple. I dined with the whole party twice; but, as I had received an absolute denial to all my hopes, I was· there only on the footing of afViend. Still I had the felicity of being near Mrs. Brisač, and I found, if I was not corn¬ er 0' pletely
, pletely happy, I at least enjoyed я tran¬ quillity I had never felt before. "Oh Frederic! how very unlike the pleasures I foolishly thought I enjoy¬ ed with Madame De Fleury î When I recalled the scenes at Paris, anei con¬ trasted them with those I was then en¬ gaged in, I cursed my folly and look¬ ed upon it as a blank in my life, whieh I anxiously wished to erase f vom my mind. " I should have continued in this state, had not a letter arrived from the doctor, stating my flight and my fa¬ ther's intentions of pursuing me. Mr. Dainville, with all that delicacy which marks his character, informed me of the contents, saying he should not make any of his family acquainted with it, and he would advise me, by ай means, to discontinue my visits, as it wo u lei
would give pain to him and his daugh¬ ter, should rny disagreeable circum¬ stances arise, after the arrival of my father. He said he thought I hatl seen enough of Mrs. Brisač now, to be convinced that her intentions were fixed, never to enter into a second mar¬ riage. ' You have heard her discourse upon the subject, and I am certain your good sense will point out to you the necessity there is of relinquishing о is r society. Believe me, when I as¬ sure you, that nothing can give me more pain, than the thought of not see¬ ing you daily amongst us.' " He used a number of arguments to bring me Over to his way of think¬ ing, and, at last, succeeded in shewing 4 me the necessity tliere was for my complying with his advice. I con¬ sented, and that evening, under a pre¬ tence of urgent business a considerable distance
distance from Turin, took my leave. I bore up very well, till I quitted Mrs. Brisač ; but, when she expressei! a wish that she might see me again s<>ou x I was obliged to break from her abrupt¬ ly, and leave the house. " ï returned to my apartments in a state of madness ; but Le Brun again came in as an auxiliary, and persuaded me not to leave Turin, but to assume a disguise, and continue near, tu watch the motions of my father, if he came there ; and, ifhe did not, as soon as I knew where he was, I might occasion¬ ally visit the family again. This scheme fixed, I immediately put it iu execu¬ tion the more readily, as I had observed the letters which Mr. Dainville liad received from the doctor were not di¬ rected for him at Turin, but Nice, and they had been sent after him, and that by a very roundabout way, as his cor¬ respondent
respondent at Nice did not know ex¬ actly where to direct him. Le Brun informed tbe people of the hotel of my departure, but said the luggage would be left there, as İt was uncertain when we shoukl return, and the apartments would be retained. I then changed my dress, and went to a f hort distance from the house of Mr. Dainville ; passed for a Frenchman, and there waited in anxious expectation the arri¬ val of* my father and you. I caused some one to be placed at all the different hotels, u here I thought you might take up your abode, with a full descrip¬ tion of my father, yourself and the doctor. "I had been about a fortnight in my new habitation, when I was inform¬ ed by Le Brun of your being come.—· From that time, he was constantly watching all your motions. He found you
you were ignorant of Mr. Dainville s place of residence, and augured much from that, I ivas led to hope, that, tired at last of searching for me, and despairing of finding Mr. Dainville, you would soon take your departure for some other place ; but, one morning, Le Brun entered my room, saying all my hopes were vanished, for lie liad seen you get out of Mr. Dainville's car¬ riage, and, soon after, some of the fa¬ rnih hael returned with you to the ho¬ tel, where m ν father was. Ko one can tell the miseries í endured, м hen I was informed that you were there daily, and it was supposed my father meant to stay some time at Turin. By means of a servant irt the house, we soon fountl that my father ivas almost constantly there, and at last, to drive me mad in¬ deed, I was told that he had made pro¬ posals to Mrs. В ; that you were coiv fineel to your bed, in a high fever, and ia
in your ravings, you had discovered as great an attachment to Mrs. Brisač as myself. I knew your tortures, Frede¬ ric, by what I myself felt. I pitied, and would have consoled you if I durst, but that I could not, and, in a few days, I was as ill as you. "When I recovered, whieh was not for rome weeks after, I found that you had left my father abruptly and goiie f no one knew were, and he was by this sudden stroke confined to his bed. I dreaded to hear Le Brun's voice, lest he should siiy Mrs. Brisač is the wife of your fa¬ ther. At length, -weary of this sus¬ pense, I ventured to ask Whether he had hearel how my fiither was, and if Mrs. B. was Countess of Krauntøie. — * Your rather/ said he, ť is still very ill, and there is not yet any Countess Krauntzie.' ' Not yet/said I, 'for Hea¬ vens sake what dost thou mean ? ť Is it deter-
determined that she is to be my mother- in-law ?' * I don't know, ' said he ; ' the count is still ill, at his hotel, and Mrs. B. and all the family frequently visit him; but nothing is known. What is designed in future I cannot tell; but, by being so very attentive, I should suppose that it İs designed to take place, when the count is recovered/ 'Then I will not stay to see it,' said I, and instantly gave directions for my departure. Ill as I was, nothing that the poor fellow could say would induce me to continue in Turin, *'l set off immeeliately for Home, and in elissipation sought to dronw all thoughts of the blessing I had lost, fully determined never more to enter any place where my father was known to be. I got whatever money I want¬ ed, from a merchant to whom í gave draughts on my steward. The jubilee commcii-
commenced ; I entered into all com¬ panies of gentlemen, who were dispo¬ sed to spend it in my way. I drank incessantly ; the company of ladies I studiously avoided, and sought in wine and the gaming table an alleviation of my uneasiness. Among a set of riotous young men and sha-pers, I lost a con¬ siderable sum ; but from this destruc¬ tive vice, I was drawn by tlie interpo¬ sition of my better angel. " One eîay, I had left the room we had been in, where I had betted high, and lost a considerable sum, to get something I wanted, when I was met by a gentleman, who askeel me to walk with him into another room ; he had something particular to say to mc. lie went on—I followed. He shut the door, and said : ť You have losi con*- siderahly at play, sir : I have been an unconcerned spectator, and was very sorry V
sorry to see you stript a« you were. Do you know those with whom you have played ľ ( Not particularly/ said I— 4 Do you think them gentlemen ? 4 Yes'·— 'Then stop here with me, and you will be convinced of the contrary ; but I must get you to promise that you touch not a card again, ifyou are con¬ vinced of their real characters. ' * Tis done/ said I, ' and I pledge my honor to abide by it/ " As I said this, I heard a loud laugh in an adjoining room; several people seemed to enter, and I instantly recog¬ nized the voices of my successful an¬ tagonists. Their discourse turned on their success, and, from the whole of it, I learnt they had won from myself, and a young Neapolitan nobleman, ten thousand pounds ; and then went on to explain to each other in what manner they had duped us. ' Are you .satisfied
satisfied ?' asked the gentleman. ' I am/ said I, 'and here relig^usly swear to abide by the promise I have made you ; and earnestly entreat, that you will permit me to consider you as my sincerest friend.' ' You have that permission/ said he, 'and, ifit is in -my power to serve you, during youv stay at Rome, I shall be happy to do it. 1 was once young and volatile as your¬ self, and, like you, was the dupe of ■sharpers. I suffered severely for my folly, and have made it a practice, for some years, to warn every young man I see plunging into that folly, which destroyed my peace and hopes for ever in this world,—but, in the next, I hope for happiness. J " There was something in this gen¬ tleman's conversation, that charmed one, and I ventured to ask him several questions. He told me, lie had given the
the same warning ..to the young gen·*. tleman, who had been my companion, but he heeded it not He meant to have brought him to the room we were in, that he might have been convinced as I was ; but he left the house too ab¬ ruptly. He was himself well acquainted with every part of the building, and aaid, He knew the room they always £ame to, after they had stripped any novice. I learnt from his discourse, that he was a Roman by birth, of a noble family ; but had dissipated his patrimony, at an early period. I Je was at last made sensible of .his errors, but too late to retrieve his fortune. He lobt the object of his tenderest wishes, by deat]i ; and, soon after this, anuncie dietim and, by that circumstance, he was again reinstated in the ninklie-was born to. He had invariably adhered •to his first; resolutions made m adver¬ sity,, of never■■•ag&hi/gVu'hig fox any sum
sum whatever ; and those who had lis¬ tened to his advice hael never forgot that it saved them from ruin. É I shall be happy', said he, ' to rank you among the number of young men, who, con¬ vinced of their weakness, can find plea¬ sure in the company of an olel man.' " I assured him, I would lose no op* portunity of paying my respects, anel profiting by his generous advice. We parted, and from that hour, I became a constant inmate of his liouse. I im¬ parted to him the situation of my heart and the determination I had made, ne¬ ver to return to my native home. He reasoned me into calmness; I mixed in company, but they were rational beings, and I conversed with ladies, if their cem versation bore the least affinity to Mrs. Brisac's. " I thought I saw you, one night, * v at
at a masquerade, in the company of the Prince of Bononi ; but, mistaking you at first for a gentleman I did not like, I avoided you, and sought my friend. I could not find him. I want¬ ed lo ascertain who you were. When I returned, you were gone, and, in spite ofall my endeavours, I coukl not discover you afterwards. <s I continued at Home some time, when my friend had busmen that call¬ ed him to Florence. He asked me to accompany him ; I did, and, by ac¬ cident, discovered you had been there, and had likewise spent some time at Bononi. I was then convinced that you were the person I saw at Rome. I caused several ei?quiries te be made at the palace > the only intelligence I coukl gain, was, that you had been near' three months there; but, since yourdepartureiromHome, you had not returned.
returned. 1 enquired for you at all the families that held any correspond¬ ence with the prince, hut no one could» give me the least account, u My friend was indefatigable in the search ; but, like myself, was unsuccess ful, till about two months ago, when he happened to meet a father of the order of mendicants, whom he had known some years before, but had not seen for a long while. In the course of their con versation, hehappened to men¬ tion the prince. My friend then spoke of you, and askeel him If he had ever seen you at Bononi. He answered, lie hael, and, if it would give him any satisfac-! tion, to know where you then resided,: he would inform him. Nothing, he said, could give him more pleasure ; as it would make a very particular friend of his, happy. He then slightly hinted to the father, my situation ; and what Vol. II. D greatly
greatly surprised him, was, that the iather seemed perfectly acquainted with every ekenmstance, antl could tell him more of our affairs, than he knew him¬ self. However he toiei him where I might gain intelligence of you. I was to enquire fot Captain Krauntzie, at talis palace, aad theie I shouiel be in- šbrmed of your residence. "I hastened from Florence, and came here ; my friend accompanietl me, and is now at a short distance from the park, at the house of a captain of a galley, who gave us a strange account of this place, and its inhabitants, whom he Biaguifiedto a thousand men, and that they aU belonged to the prince Bononi, who, he said, kept them to take to the war with him, if he should be called upon. We asked, how often they were seen —'Hardly ever/ said he, * except mee, now and then; for, they have a galley
galley aud boats of their own ; and, as they never talk to any body in the island so nobody talks to them.They arestrange men/added he, 'altogether, and there is but one woman in the palace, and she was born there, I believe, and so was her husband, who is the man that takes care of the ground. What is done with the produce, nobody knows» but I suppose the gentlemen soldiers who live there do what they like with it. The woman that livôs there is a good sort of a plain creature, but is always melancholy. Her father and mother died there, they say, and she has never been happy since. * : From this man'sdiscourse* we coukl not suppose you were here, especially as he said lie had never seen any gen¬ tleman, that answered the descri priori we gave of you. However, I was re¬ solved to seek, and, under a pretence D S3 of
of looking at the ruins of the palace, ï came here yesterday; but, not seeing any one, the tottering situation of the fabric deterred me from going in, lest something or other should fall about my ears. As I was about to return, I heard a crash, as if some material part of the building had fallen in—soon .after I saw the woman ; from her I enquired Whether any person was hurt ; but she gave me the answer I told you of, and, finding you were from home, I thoughtit best to return to my friend, and come again to day, when I had the happiness of finding you." The captain thanked his brother for his relation, and, in as few words as possible, gave him an account of what had passed since he saw him last : he briefly informed him of the nature of the community, and the necessity there would
would be of his keeping his being there a secret from his fi ienel. He told him of the engagements he was under to return to Bononi, and, on that account, it would be impossible for him to quit the society, till after that period, when he hoped he should be at liberty to leave them. He assureel him, that, as soon as he hael fulfilled his engage¬ ments with the community, he would return to him ; not that he could ever hope for any happiness, but in the friendship of himself and Fitzallan. His brother tried to persuade him ; but at last, finding all arguments vajn, he forbore to press him, saying He would rest satisfied that he had rea¬ sons for his stay. They then settled a mode of corres¬ pondence, and it was agreed that, till they met again, theyshouíd inform each other, wherever they might be obliged Ό3 to
to go. The captain said, he would not urge his longer stay, lest those of the society, that were at home, should insist upon his continuing amongst them which he did not by any means think proper, as circumstances might occur, to make it dangerous tothe whole com¬ munity ; and what urged the captain more to have him depart was, for fear that ifhe was eletameel they might dis¬ cover he was the person they duped at Rome. He, therefore, after making his brother repeat his promise of not telling his friend, or any person upon earth, ^here he then was, and the na¬ ture of h is engagements, conducted him back again to the end of the park, anel they parted. The count returned to his friend, saying, he had received information that he should most cer¬ tainly hear of his brother at Florence, at which place be ivas to be in about a month. This account satisfied him, and
and they left the island, happy in the idea that they had not lost their labour. As soon as the captain returned tothe house, he went to Fitzallan'sroom, and informed· them all that his brother was a'one, but that lie had exacted from him a solemn promise, not to tell any one living that he had seen him, as he did not want to leave the community. This gave pleasure to all, as they did not like to lose their captain ; neither did they choose to have another mem¬ ber added to the society, in the present state of affairs. They asked the captain Whether his brother had said any thing about the storm. Ile told them he had not men¬ tioned asinglc word on the subject, and therefore, supposed he had not noticed it, any more than an ordinary thunder storm. D 4 "This/'
"This/* said he, "convinces mc that the fury ofit was exhausted in the park, and on the building, and confirms what I have before suggested, that it was meant as a warning for us to think of settling in life, and not live in the manner we do." Some more discourse to the same ef¬ fect passed, when the captain asked How Vashti was ? The father said, that by force of the opiate she was perfectly tranquil, as was Michael, who, as long as he saw his master there, was content. They went down again to the great room, when it was agreed that all those who had sať up the preceding night, should go to bed, ancl the captain, Fitoifan and father Gregory, should stay up in their stead. This settled, they went to bed, though it was e\ i- dent, in fear, lest the storm shoukl re¬ turn in the night. When
When they were gone, a long and interesting conversation took place be¬ tween the father, the captain and Fitz¬ allan, respecting the agency of spirits, and the power they were supposed to have over the actions of man. The father, as a support of his hypothesis, quoted St, Augustin, Plutarch, Livy, Dama-ais, Tyrus, SynvpHcius, St. Mar¬ tin, St. Agathius, lamblichus, St. Ju¬ lian, Ptolemy, and many others, both aucieut and modern, who had written on the subject, all tending to prove the reality of his assertions, that theie arc spirits, who have power to act as good and bad agents. "Of the former, I will maintain/* said he, "from the uncontroverted svstem of Arbatel, that man mav, by a strict adherence to the first principles of religion, as laid down by the word of God, acquire that knowledge that D 5 *" will
will enable.him to act himself, and call into action numberless spirita, that are by divine permission subject to them. For, what says Arbatel ? "The greatest precept of magic is to know what every man ought to receive for his use from the assisting spii its, and what to refuse ; which he may learn of the Psalmist-^ * Wherewith shall a younar man cleanse his way? In keeping thy word, O Lorek' To keep the word of God* so tliat the evil one snatch it not out of the heait, is the chief precept of wisdom. It is lawful to admit of, and exercise, other suggestions, which are not contrary to the glory of God, anel charity to¬ wards our neighbour; not enquiring from what spirit such suggestions pro¬ ceed : but we ought to take hceel that we are not too much busied about un¬ necessary things, according to the ael- monit ion of Christ 'Martha, Martha, thou art troubled about many things, but
but Mary hath chosen the better part, which shall not be taken from her.' ťí There-fore, let us always have re¬ gard unto the saying of Christ. ť Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and ail these things shall be added unto you.' All other tkings t that is, all things, which are due to the mortal microcosm, as food, raiment, and the necessary arts of this life.-—-- TJiere is nothing so much hccometh a man, as constancy in his words anil deeds ; and, when the like rejoiceth İr* the like, there are none more happy than such, because the holy angels are - conversant about such and possess the* custoely of them. On the contrary, nien that are inconstant, are lighter than nothing. Even as every one go- verneth himself, so he allureth unto- himself spirits of his nature anel con¬ dition. But one very truly aelviseth,* D 6 tliat
that no man should cany liimself be¬ yond his own calling, lest he shoukl draw unto himself some malignant spi¬ rit from the utmost parts of the earth, by whom he shall be infatuated and de¬ ceived, or brought to final destruction. This precept appeareth most plainly ; for P Midas, when he would convert all things into gold, drew up such a spirit unto himself, which was able to perform this ; and, being deceived by him, he had been brought to death by famine, if his foolishness had not been correct¬ ed by the mercy of God. " The same thing happened to a cer¬ tain woman, at Frankfort on the Oder, in our times. Would that men would diligently weigh this precept, and not account the histories of Midas and the like for fables. They would be much more diligent in moderating their thoughts and affections ; neither would they
thev be so perpetually vexed with th? spirits of the golden mountains of Uto¬ pia. There we ought most diligently to observe that such presumption should be cast out of the mind by the word of God. Neither let them have any habit to the idle mind, that is empty of Hie divine word. He that is faithfully conversant in his vocation, shall have the spirits also constant companions of his desires, who will successfully sup¬ ply him in all things, But, ifhe have any knowledge in magic, they will not be unwilling to shew him, and to serve him in those several mysteries unto which they are addicted; the good spi¬ rits in good things unto salvation ; the evil spirits in every evil thing unto de¬ struction, "Examples are not wanted in history of the whole workl, and do daily happen ш the world. Theodosius, before
fore the victory of Arbogantus, is an example of the gooel ; Brutus, before he was- slain, was an example of the evil spirits, when he was so persecuted of the spirit of Cæsar, and exposed to punishment, that he slew himself, who hael slain his own father and the fatlier of his country, "All magic is a relation of spirits of that kinel ; so that the nine muses are called in Ilesioel the ninth magic, as he manifestly testifieth of himself iu his theogony. In Homer, the genius of Ulysses y in Psigiogagia, Hermes, (iod revealeth himself to Moses in the bush. The three wise men who came to seek Christ at Jerusalem were leel by the angel of the Lord. The angels of the Lord directed Daniel. Therefore, there is nothing whereof any one may glory ; for, it is not unto him that willeth, nor unto him that runneth, but to whom Goel
God will have mercy. From hence springeth all magic, and thither again it will revolve, whether it be good or ел iL "In this manner, Tages, the first teacher e)f magic, at Rome, gushed out of the earth. Diana at Ephcsus shew¬ ed her worship, as if it had ben sent from Heaven, as aLso Apollo, aiul all the religion of the lieathens is taken, from the same spirits. Neither are the opinions of the Saelucees human inven¬ tions. Whosoever desireth familiarly to have a conversation with spirits, let him keep himself from all enormous sins, and diligently pray to the most high God, to be his ke-eper, and he sliall break through all the snares and impediments of the Devil; and let him apply himself to the service of Goel, and he will give him an increase in wis¬ dom. All things are possible to them that
that believe, and are willing to receive them. But to the incredulous and un¬ willing, all things are impossible. There is no greater hindrance thai; a wavering mind, levity, inconstancy, foolish bab¬ bling, drunkenness, lust, and disobedi¬ ence to the word of God. A magician therefore ought to be a man that-is god¬ ly, honest, constant in his words and deeds, having a firm faith towards God, prudent and covetous of nothing but wisdom, about divine things. *— "Thus far Arbarel To convince you further, and to confirm what Ar- batel has set forth, we need only have recourse to Swedenborg, that great mys¬ tic writer, whose productions have for these last twenty years made much noise in the speculative world. Look to that part of his life, written by himself, where he says,—'The Lord himself hath called me ? who was graciously pleased
pleased to manifest himself to me, his unworthy servant, in a personal appear¬ ance, in the year one thousand seven hundred and forty three, to open inme a sight ot' the spiritual worlel, and to enable me to converse with spirits anel angels ; and this privilege has continu- «ŕ ed with me to this day. From that time, I began to print and publish va¬ rious unknown arcana, that have been either seen by me or revealed to me, concerning Heaven anel Hell, the state of men after death, the spiritual sense of the scriptures, and many other im¬ portant truths, tending to salvation and true wisdom ; and that mankind might receive benefit from those communica¬ tions, was the only motive which has ineluced me, at different times, to leave my home, to visit other countries.—■ As to this world's wealth, I have what is sufficient, and more I neither seek nor wisli for.'— "Such
"Such/* said father Gregoiy, "is the doctrine I would wish you to be¬ lieve, being convinced of the truth of it myself; and 1 think, when you have past your probationary years, you will be as much convinced as I am, tliat the violent confusion of the elements, whkh we experienced yesterday, was brought about by means of those inha¬ bitants of the air, I am persuaded that our search was not agreeable to those spirits, and for some' wise and good purpose, the demons were raised te> alarm us, and to point out, «though in an indirect way, the wickedness of liv¬ ing in a society, whose support is rapine anel whose riches are plunder. I see you are surprised to hear me talk thus, since I must have made this place my choice to reside in ; but, ifyou knew the disastrous events of my life, you would not wonder at my staying here.
but
But you will probably say, what dis¬ astrous events can have happened to a man, whose profession precludes him from talcing any active part in life, and prevents him from experiencing the vicissitudes of it. А1аз ! that has not been my case ; I have experienced the most distressing changes; my heart has been wrung with agony, and my body lacerated with stripes. I have sunk unpitied beneath the galling } r oke of bondage and mental derangement, while an unfeeling barbarian has stood over me w T ith thongs, to urge me to- labour I was unable to execute." The tears started into his eyes ; he lift- eel them to heaven, anel softly ejacula¬ ted a prayer of resignation to the will of his creator. "If it woulel not awaken too keenly a remembrance of your sor¬ rows, ' said Fitzallan, * I would venture te> beg a relation of your misfortunes." I
" I will give it you/' answered he ; "my heart is now nearly steeled against all remembrance, though a teaï will sometimes start involuntary, but I strike it off, and strive to think no more. u I am a native of Cambray, and the first morning of my birth was that when the Duke of Marlborough, with his victorious troops, entered that city. My father was one of the most consi¬ derable men in it, and my birth being made known to the duke, he signified his intentions of being one of my god¬ fathers, as I was born a subject to his sovereign. This honor was joyfully accepted by my parents, and, asj grew up, I received instructions suitable to my future expectations. "After having attained the first rudiments of the classics, I was sent to England to perfect my education, whicli
which I acquired with such facility, that, at the age of sixteen, I was per¬ fect master of nine different languages, including Latin, Greek, anel Hebrew, besides being well versed in mathema¬ tics, geography, natural philosophy, and astronomy, with all the lighter accomplishments of dancing, fencing, drawing, and the military exercise. I took mv elearees at college, anel re- mained in England till I was recalled by my father. The duke had promised him great things respecting mc ; but his promises, í believe, were no sooner made, than forgotten. My father, of- fendeel at the neg'ect of his grace, would not permit me to continue near him ; I was of course obliged to leave England. I returned, and, in about a year after, I lost my father. " I was consigned to the caie of a gentleman, who had been the particu¬ lar
lar friend of my father from their in¬ fancy. He was a widower, with two daughters. The eldest was about twenty—the other fifteen ; neither of them handsome, but both very agree¬ able iu their persons and manners» My mother had been dead about five years, and I had one year and a half before I came of age ; and, as my education was completed, my guardian made me an offer of residing with him till that period arrived. (i I was fond of books to an excess, and literally dedicated the whole of my time to them. I met the ladies at table, but scarcely remembered they were present. At hist, I was roused from my insensibility, by my guardian's one day hastily entering my room, and exclaiming, 'Ah ! Monsieur Marlbro', my eldest daughter'—— £ What of your daughter, sir ?' said I> ' She к 'dying .ľ
dying ľ exclaimed he. * My God ľ said I, and started up,—* where ? how ? when' what?* * Come with rue/ said he. He went — I followed—to his daughter's loom. She was on the beel> in convulsions. I ran to her, and raised her up. ť For tbe Almighty's ьаке/ said I, 'send for the faculty. How came she in this condition ?* ť I know not/ said he ; i I have sent for Doctor X—he will be here in a minute*,' " The doctor en tereyi ; the whole house ivas in the greatest confusion. He took hold of her hand ; felt lier pulse, askeel several questions, and, at iast, declared she was poisoned. We stared with amazement. ¿ Good God!' $aiel her father, i what do you mean ?* x There is no time te be lost/ said the doctor, and hurried out of the house, but soon returned with a medicine, which
which he forcibly poured down her throat. lu a few minutes, she was seized with a violent reaching, and that instantly convinced him of the truth ; but, whether it had been given her, or she had taken it herself, M'as a doubt he could not solve. " I asked for Genevieve, her sister —She was from home ; had been ab¬ sent all day; but they coukl not tell to what part of the city she was gone. The servants were interrogated respect¬ ing what she had that morning drank ; but none could give the leas>t account, as she had not had any thing brought to lier since breakfast. The doctor succeeded in his applications ; the convulsions ceased, and, in a short time, she became composed. We all left the apartment ; the doctor said He would not advise to have her dis¬ turbed; she should remain quiet, but by
by no means bc left alone for a mo¬ ment, lest the fits should return. " Her fatlier appeared like one be¬ reft of his reason. He called on his daughter in the most pathetic manner, ra\ed, and exclaimed He was lost for ever, if she should die, and could not be persuaded but that she had procured it herself. I tried to reason with him, but reasoning was vain ; tbe more I tal keel to him, the more he seemed distressed. "At last, Genevieve, which was tlic youngest daughter's name, returned. She was examined inthe strictest man¬ ner, respecting her sister; but she ap¬ peared to be more ignorant than any one. She liad left lier sister, she said, in her apartment, with her maid. She had excused herself from going out, by saving She had letters to Mrite, and», Vol. IL E hv
in consequence, Genevieve went out alone. Mademoiselle's maid was again examined ; but she could throw no light upon the transaction, and we still remained in ignorance of the cause. " Several days elapsed, before the doctor, or any one, would venture to say any thing to her on the subject. At last, Genevieve ventured to ask her, and succeeeleel in getting her to ac¬ knowledge That she had procured the poison herself, and her reason fordoing it arose from a violent attachment siie had conceived for me, anel that, in despair of gaining my affections, sîıe hael taken the resolution of destroy¬ ing herself, and for that purpose had procured the poison, whieh she had drank ; but, as soon as she began to feel its effects, she liad repented, and hastened to her father's room, to inform him what she liad done ; but, before
before she coukl pronounce a word, she felt the convulsions seize her, and, in them, fell at the feet of her father. " Genevieve was shocked, beyond measure, at the relation. She reasoned with her on the folly and wickedness of such a deed^ and brouglit her, at last, to be sensible of those punish¬ ments, that ever await a suicide. She burst into tears, acknowledged her fault, and eamestlv intreated she would implore her father s pardon, and assure him she was sensible of her errors, and beo-o'cd she would not make me ac- \7j\777* quainted with it. But this last Gene* λϊ e ve would not promise. She left her r and came immediately to her father. ΐ was with him. She related to us all that had passed between them. " My surprise even exceeded her father's. Though he felt for his child» Е Я, yet
yet he condemned her folly, and said She should immediately prepare for a convent ; but this I strongly opposed, saying, I was iu hopes time would cure her of her attachment. That, her father said, was impossible ; the passion of girls gathered strength from opposition, and be could never hope to see her ray wife. J And why not/ saki I, ' ifyou do not object to it ? 1 ** I spoke this without reflecting on what I said. I had never once con¬ sidered the person of Mademoiselle La Touche. ' She mny be handsome, ' said I to myself; ' I have been told she is amiable ; and, as I am expected to marry, she will probably make me as good a wife as any other.' I had never felt what it was to love. I knew not the pangs unhappy lovers reel, and, of course, was ignorant of those plea¬ sures which spring from mutual at¬ tachment.
tachment. My books hatl been my mistress, and í never had formed a thought of enjoying greater happiness. But this circumstance had opened a new field for study, widely different from the tracts I had hitherto pursued, and led my ideas into a perfectly new channel. I thought love must be a strange and ungovernable passion, if it could lead people to act so extrava¬ gantly, and to run the risque of losing everlasting happiness. I felt a new sensation rising in my bosom, I longed to give ease to the heart of Miss La Touche. Humanity urged me to this, and I foolishly set it down for love. The lady's fortune was much beneath what I had a right to expect ; but that, I thought, was apaultry con¬ sideration, and I had read that the goods of fortune were but little re¬ garded by philosophers—and to be as like one as I possibly could, had ever E 3 been
been the first object of my ambition. Here then I thought opened a field, that would at once stamp me one in the eyes of those who had souls supe¬ rior to the narrow reasonings of the world. 'Í will be her husband/said I, r if it will contribute to her peace/ * 4 Her father started ; Genevieve looked earnestly in my face, as if to say; for Gods sake, say that over again, I really don't understand you. Her rather seemed to express the same ; I read their thoughts. * I will be Miss La Touched husband/ said I, address¬ ing myself to him, ' if it meets your approbation. I am ignorant of the forms of courtship, and as your daughter lias plainly evinced her attachment for me, I think there need not be any idle non¬ sense of that sort/ * You have not considered/ said my guardian,
guardian, * what you offer. Do you know that'I can give my daughter but very little, and your fortune is largo enough, t о command one very consider¬ able r' *It may so/ I replied; * bu* v according to my mode of reasoning, happiness does not consist in riches, but in the comforts of domestic life/ * True, ' said he ; ť that is what a mau of a narrow confined income might say with propriety ; but those that have been blessed with a more liberal quan¬ tity of the goods of the world, ought to live in a sphere of life suitable to those liberal gifts ; and, as there arc but few to whom Dame Fortune grants h 'T favors, it is nee essary those few bhould make a figure in tlie world, that the community may be benefited by a distribution of their wealth.' ť Very probably, sir/ said I ; 'all this is very good doctrine to the world- E 4 Jy
ly wise, and to those who place happiness in riches. That does not happen to be my case; I have never lived, as tliey called it, in the great workl ; but I have seen enough of its fooleries to despise them. I have no idea of keeping a fine house, a fine horse, a fine coach, or a parcel of ielle rascals, that might be more properly employed in serving the state, merely because I have gota fortune; and to be thought a wise man, I must at once become as great a fool as my neigh¬ bours, and endeavour with them to try wiiich can be ruined first, because it is the fashion to cut a figure, and run in debt to ail my tradesmen as much as I possibly can, with a full assurance that I shall never pay them. No, sir ; I like none of this; I will marry \our daughter, and live as I like, that is, in rational obscurity, and let the follies ôf the world be pursued by those, who have
have not faculties to relish more sub¬ lime pleasures. Go to your sister, Genevieve/ said I, 'and tell her, if she can gain her father's consent, I am read} to become her hibband.' 'Lord ! sir/ said the dear girl, 4 I know not how to carry such a message to my «.liter. Surely you have not enough considered it, ami should I go and tell her this, and you repent it af¬ terwards, the consequence would be worse than w hat has appeared already 5 for, in the train of thinking she now is in, I have not the least doubt but she will be able to conquer her attachment/ 4 1 would not have her conquer it,' said I; 4 if I weie to consider of it for a month, I should liave just the same sentiments ; tlierefore, sir, as I cannot bear to keep any one in pain, w hen it is in my power to relieve them, I beg you will oblige me so far as to see your E ã daughter
daughter yourself, since Genevieve will not, and let her know what my inten¬ tions are/ ζ{ He hesitated, endeavoured to per¬ suade me, but persuasions were vain. Seeing me determined, he acquiesced, and, not to trouble you with a detail of particulars, in a short time, I became the husband of Miss La Touche, í thought myself the happiest being in existence. I hael known no bliss till then. I found her mind stored with knowledge. Her person, tliough uot so strikingly beautiful, as the poets feign their nymphs, yet she had enough to excite the tenderest love ; at least, I thought so, and felt myself happy. " I had some few mouths to come of my being of age ; I waited with Impatience for the time when I should be able to make a more ample provi¬ sion
sion for my wife, and place her in a •iituation more consonant to my love. The time came; I removed to my own house, and the amiable Genevieve ac¬ companied us for a short time. She vas the life of our little society. Iler faiher had been immersed in mercan¬ tile affairs for some years, which had petplcxeel him much ; and, a short time after our unióval, he called, and in¬ foi med us, that wc should be obliged to go to Tangiers, or lose a very consider¬ able sum that ^as due to him from a merchant there, whose affairs were iu such a derail geel state-, as called for tlie most active excitions. Ile saiei* he woidd leave Genevieve under our pro¬ tection, tili ¡йъ return, which he hoped wouhl be soon. My wile was near lying in ; she was very much dis¬ tressed at parting from her father ; but, after a few days, her uneasiness wore off, and tranquillity again rented with E 6 Uo,
its. I was blessed, in a short time, with a son. This gave additional plea¬ sure to us all, and we had likewise thy satisfaction of hearing of the safe ar¬ rival of my ŕather-m-la\ľ ; but lie said He feared his stay would be longei than he wished, as the whole of the perplexing business had devolved on him to settle, " We continued in this state of happiness for many months, regulai 1\ hearing from Tangiers, when a proposal was made to mc by a young gentleman, the second son of a man of family in the neighbourhood, for leave to address. Genevieve, As we could not possibly have any objection to this offer, I gave my consent. Genevieve was all life and spirits, ever ready toimpait plea¬ sure to every one that interested them- >elves for her. As ber heart was free, she received the addresses of this young mau»
man. Пс was about two-anil-twenty, rall, and pleasingly formed, of a cheer¬ ful elisposition, and possessed a happy facility of t urni π«? every thing to the most advantage to his future hopes. Genevieve seemed to like him ; but Jier viziatile disposition prevented us from forming a just opinion of her sentiments. '' He had been upon an intimacy at our house near three months, when a letter arrived from my father-in-law, btating, That, in consequence of unre¬ mitted attention to the business he was ensnared in, his health had suffered much, and he feared, unless be cou lei relax in some measure, he should never live to return. He hinted a wish to >ee all his children once more; but, as ihat was, he said, impossible, be should try to reconcile himself to his fate. Mv wife, who loved her father tenderly, was
was instantly aku metí. She would go tohim, she ¡»aid ; and, if ohe could not prevail upon him to return л\ ith her, bhe would stay mid close his eye·*·. I was surprise! to hear her talk in this manner. 'Surelv, my love/.said l, * you know not what yua talk of. You forget tho-»c rende'i ties that bind you tothis count ry; \ ou forget your chilei; vou ibi üret me : \on г'ощ< t (îe- uevievc.' * 1 ilo not, í do not folget either/ said siie. bursting into tears ; t but I feel for m\ poor father, vvho ha» no one to administer the least com¬ fort to him. Hitherto, hu ha> been accustomed to leceive the tenderest attention from his chikircn ; ami, wlien he felt pain, they were ever ready to alleviate, and soothe it. Now, he İs in a strange countiy, without a single friend to as&ibt him.' У Secing her so much diotiesscd, my mind
mind wab on the rack to thľnk uhat I could ею. At last, a thought struck me, that, as I had nothing to confine me to my home, I might go with my wife and family to Tangiers, and con¬ tinue there, till AÍ. La Touche shouiel be able to return ; and I imagined, in all probability, I should he able to assist him in the arrangement of bis affairs, and, by that means, accelerate lus re¬ in rn to liis native country. Flushed u 'trh tliis idea, I communicated it to my wife, who immediately came into my way of thinking. Genevieve was our next consideration. She entcreel into our views, and was happy in the thought she should again see her father. We therefore gave the necessary orders to prepare for our departure, anel I set about settling my affairs; that, in case of accidents, my wife and child might be provided for. This was completed hi
in a few davs, and, in about a fort¬ night, every thing was ready. 4 · At tliis crİM-3, an obstacle occurred, whicii we had not foreseen. This was the lover of Genevieve. He had been in Paris, with his family, near a week, when M. La Tonche'.s letter arrived. We had written, to inform him of our intention of leaving Cambray, and our reasons for taking* Genevieve. Wc did not receive any answer to this, and therefore, three clays previous to our intended departure, we wrote again ; but, before tliat letter reached Paris, he was at our house. He was distracted at the idea of our going, lie used every argument an impassioned lover could urge, to prevail on me to alter our plan, or, at least, to defer it till he was become the husband of Genevieve. But, as this period depended on cir- cumstances, I could not accede to it. My
My wife was impatient to be gone; Genevieve no less so. His friends had îiot given their absolute consent to the union ; his establishment was not fixed ; and, without the full approbation of hib family, I was certain my sister-in- law wouhi not be his wife, as her for¬ tune was not by any means despicable, and her family, though her father was involved in business, by no means in¬ ferior to his, " These circumstances were pointed out to him ; but, like all lovers, he found the means to obviate them all, lie prayed, intreated that we would suspend our departure for a few days, whiht he should set off for Paris to his p'uciits, and there plead tlie cause of hn?, that he might return and make Genevieve his wife before our depar¬ ture. His heart being set upon going to her father, she would uot hear of it;
it: but he found iwiiz to gain my consent to sfry, while he went to Ins friends If he succeeded, he ^vas to return within such a limited time ; if not, we were to proceed without «eeing lunu " We »stayed, under the greatest anxiety, Genevieve constantly declar¬ ing She would not be his wife, till she- had again seen her rather. The time appointed came; but no Vaucluse made his appearance; we, therefore, wrote to him, anel hastened to Havre, where we were to embark. W r e reached * there in safety, and, five days after, sailed with a fair wind. My little boy and my wife felt severely the effects of the sea, for the first four d;n*s ; but Genevieve was but slightly afiected by it ; the child's nurse was very ill. ťí We had been out at sea nine day» ; three
three of the Inst wc had been nearly becalmed, only at times catching a gentle breeze. On the morning of the tenth, the man on the look-out espied a sail a-head, bearing down with oars, chicli appeared to gain upon us every moment The captain took his glass» î was standing by him at the moment I observed his countenance change, as he viewed the approaching object. In au instant, all was hurry and confusion ; all hands were summoned upon deck, anel orelers given to prepare for action. * This is no trifling* enemy/ said the captain, turning to his men ; i we must, my lads, prepare to sell our lives dearly, and uot flinch; we must conquer or die : it will be a tough bout, but never mind.' " To tell you what I felt, when I discovered the approaching sail to bea Salice rover, would be more than I am capable
capable of My wife, my child, my sister, rushed like a torrent on my mind ; but there was no time for deli¬ beration. They were placed iu the hold for safety, and all Jiands appeared on deck. Our ship mounted six brass swivels, and two two-pounders on the quarter-deck. She had ten men, in¬ cluding the captain, and nine passen¬ gers, seven of whom were my family ; the others, a gentleman and his ser¬ vant, who had remained in liis birth, owing to thčillness he had experienced from sea-sickness. The rover bore down rapidly upon us. The captain desired I would go to the ladies, as my ignoiance in maritime affairs might be fatal to me, but could not possibly be¬ nefit him. I descended, and found my wire, through terror, had fallen into fits. She clasped her infant to her bosom, and Genevieve found it impos¬ sible to disengage him, she held him so
ло tight. However, I at last succeed¬ ed in getting him from her. I caught her in my arms. I tried to make her sensible Σ was near her, but in vain.—· Poor Genevieve held the dear babe to her bosom and kept close to ns. "In the mean time, the rover had overtaken and endeavoured to board us, but was beat off by the guns and a fire of small arms. She was a large galley, mounted twelve guns, with a hundred men. The fire of our swivels and mus- quctry hael made considerable havoc among them. The pirate, irritated at thcir repulse, returned to the charge with redoubled fury. The fight con¬ tinued near twenty minutes, when they succeeded in boarding us. At that in¬ stant, the other passenger, whom we had not before seen, entered the holel covered with blooek He ran eagerly to us, and clasped my sister to his bleeding
bleeding bosom. ŕ Ah! Genevieve/ said he, i and is it thus we part for ever ? would to heaven you had listen¬ ed to my advice ľ "I looked earnestly In the face of the stranger, and discovered in him the features of Vaucluse. Soon after the barbarians entered. Genevieve dropped insensible on the floor*. Afy dear babe bv the fall had received a I/ blow which cut his cheek; the blood flowed in streams, I caught \ψ the suffering innocent, and endeavoured to stop the effusion with linen, whieh I tore in agony from my breast My poor wife was still insensible. I turn¬ ed to tbe wretches that had entered, and, in Moorish, deprecated theii' pity for the helpless victims that lay before them. They regarded us for a minute with silent indignation ; then turning to me, said the christian dog had made too
too great a resistance, to expect pity from them, and b^de us prepare to re¬ ceive their captain. "At that moment, a tall ferocious lookin»; man entered. He surveyed the miserable group with apparent plea¬ sure, and gave orders for our being con¬ veyed on board the galley. I accosted him and implored his pity, but in vain. The slaves took my wife in thcir amis. I endeavoured to oppose them, but was struck down ; my bleeding infant was snatched from -me ; í was loaded with chains, and the miserable Vaucluse, who had, I afterwards found, assisted to defend the ship, and was much wounded, was loaded with heavier chains than myself We were all conveyed «on board the pirate, and, oh ! misera¬ ble to relate ! I saw, for the last time, my dear, my tender wife.
"Vaucluse,
* ' Vaucluse, myself and three others, all that remained of the crew, were pla¬ ced together. The captain hail been killed the moment tlic infidels succeed¬ ed in boarding the vessel. Vaucluse"» servant, who had fought by the side of his master, fell likewise. At that uni¬ ment, Vaucluse, who had received a severe wound on his heael, and another on his arm, quitted the deck and de¬ scended to us. Six of the crew were killed by the fire from the galley, and the pirates hael lost thrcc-atid-twcnty of theirs. When I found we were to be separated from all I held dear in life, reason fled, and í became the wretch¬ ed victim of merci less barbarians. Ah ! my God ! pity the past sufferings of the being thou hast formed, and, out of thy merciful goodness, hasten that period, wheu my aged eyes will close for ever iu this world, to open again in everlasting happiness ! "Pardon
"Pardon my weakness," said the good old man; "though so many years have passed over my wretched head, yet I cannot resist the tear of recollection." Fitzallan andthe captain sympathized in his sorrow, and added the tear of pity to his sufferings. After a pause, he proceeded. " Полу long I remained in a state of insanity, I know not, but, I believe, some months. During my deprivation of reason, it seemed I had been treated with lenity. Tiie Mahometans are taught a kind of respect for the miser¬ able maniacs; but that pity which they bestow on them is denied to those who are sensible of their sufferings. As soon, therefore, as reason had again resumed her seat, I awoke to all the sense of bitterness and woe. When J Vol. IL F began
began to recover, I was ordered to work in tlie garden. My portion was to dig sand, and wheel it to a distant part, where a large mount had been raised, and at whicii ail the captives worked. I had asked several questions about my •wife, «ry child, and my sister ; but they were wholly ignorant of their fate, or pretended to be so. I coukl not learn whether I was the slave of the man who captured us, or had been sold to some other. Often, when my strengtff was inadequate to the work I was set about, have I fainted, and been called back to life by the stripes of the barbarian who was set over us. u I had been in this miserable state three years, when we were informed that a company of English and French gentlemen had arrived, for the express purpose of ransoming English slaves. My heart beat with transport at the sound.
sound. ' Ah ! my God !' said I, 'hast thou at last heard the prayers of thy wretched servant, ancl shall I once more be blessed with the sight ofthose dear objects of all my cares, if they btill exist ! " I passed the night in hopes and fears, such as had nearly again overset my poor tottering brain. I had suffered severely the day before, from a punish¬ ment inflicted on me, formy inability to perform the task enjoined. My limbs were lacerated, and my body worn to a skeleton. When I was or·* dei ed out to the square among the other captives, I was too weak to stand, and was obliged to be supported thither,' ï eagerly looked around me, to see ifj amongst those that were to be redeem¬ ed, I could discover any one of the dear objects for whom my soul panted. Wholly regardless of those that were to F Я, perform
perform the work of angels, my eye revolved back with despair, A heart¬ rending sigh tore my bosom—when I found myself clasped in the arms of Vaucluse ! ! I " I dropped insensible upon his breast. I was carried out to an apart¬ ment, where those that were ransomed had assembled. Love, grief) fear, joy, ai! assailed me by turns. I looketl wildly round, and could scarcely believe my senses. All whirled in strong con¬ fusion. I had a cordial given me; it acted like electricity ; my frame seemed to feel new vigor, and I attempted to walk, with my ransomed fellow-suffer¬ ers, to the house appointed to receive us; but I again fainted, and was obliged to he carried thither. Every accommodation was procured for me that my wretched situation required ; but it was some days before î was col¬ lected
jectcd enough io talk with that faith¬ ful friend, Vaucluse, when he came to¬ me, and, in the most tender manneiv answered all my enmiiricsi "He told me, that, Before we reach- ' ed the port of Salice, which Mas not till the evening of the second day, I was in the wildest state of distraction. As soon as we came there, I was placed apart, and, from the discourse of one of the Christian slaves, who spoke French, he understood I was taken care of; but himself and the other three were treated with the greatest severity. His wounds were neglected, and, had it not been for the humanity of the Christian slave, he must have perished, the second day of liis being brought there ; but he washed iiis wounds, and procured for him a cordial, which he gave him three or four times a day. F 3 " He
* £ He had been there near a fortn igh t , before he coukl gain the least intelli¬ gence respecting the ladies. At length, through this good slave, he learnt they hael been carried up into the countiy, to a house, or rather haram, belonging to the captain, about six leagues from Sallee, and the child had been carried there likewise. This was all the intelli¬ gence he could procure, and it was not long before he was, with three others, sold to a Moorish merchant, n ho had recently come to reside at Sallee. To this worthy man he owed his liberty ; for, soon after he had been with him, he came to examine whether his wounds were enough healed, to enable him to assist in the work of the houst% the principal of which then was to cany water to andfromthebaths.IIefound him incapable of lifting any thing of w eight. He asked what friends he had, aud whether he thought they would he in¬ clined
clin cd to ransom him. Vancluse told him without reserve his real situation, and the misery he endured respecting the fate of the ladies. This good Moor gave him reason to hope every thing ; for, he would endeavour to procure intelligence of them. He bid him write home to his friends, and na¬ med the price of his ransom, which was but very little more than what he had paid for bis purchase.-^r In three weeks after, he heard that my dear, my tender Maria was no more. She had died the day after her removal from Salice. My little boy had been adopted by the captain, who had lost a son about a montii before he captured us. My dear Genevieve was alive, and that was all. One of the maids was dead, the other livinsr and well ; but my man was killed in the engagement. The good Moor said he had offered a ransom for Genevieve, F 4 but
but could not do any thing for my dear child ; he being adopted, it was to no purpose to mention it. " This/* said Vaucluse, "was the dismal tidings I received ; and, believe me, when I assure you that I could not help rejoicing in your state of insensi¬ bility, knowing how acutely you would feel your sorrows. As soon as I had procured intelligence of you, I lost not a moment in sending to my friends, for a sum sufficient to effect the ran¬ som of all ; but the Almighty decreed it otherwise; my relations did not answer my letters. My good master hael purchased my dear Genevieve ; she resided in his house, and was employed in instructing his two daughters, the one about eleven years of age, the other nine. "Here, though I could not have the
the happiness of seeing her, yet I had the satisfaction of hearing she was well, and I hatl been permitted to inform lier of my situation and yours. She had written to me, and in her letter she had earnestly desired, that I would, if anywise possible, send to her father, and briefly relate what had happened. This idea had never struck me. I had been so much taken up with the thoughts of hearing from my friends, and occupied with your miseries, that í had not even thought of the only man on earth! ought to have addressed upon the subject. I wrote immediately, ^п<\ } hy the assistance of my good friend, this letter was sent to Tangiers. What was my distress, when an answer came, announcing the death of that dear friend ! He had been dead above a week. I dreaded to imparè this news to Genevieve, and by the advice of my master, kept it from· her, IIow- F 5 ever,
λ ever, he thought it advisable to semi immediately to a correspondent he haei at Tangiers, whom he desired to apply for an account in what manner the affairs of M. La Touche had been left. " We waited a considerable time foi¬ au answer ; at length, one came, sta¬ ting that, though he hael repeatedly ap¬ plied to the gentleman to whom he had been directed, he had met with nothing hut evasive answers; that, tired out with repeated applications, he hael at iast addressed the French consul, who hael undertaken to bring the business forward, and he was led to hope it would not long be delayed. However, there were many reasons to think that the men, in whose hand« ÄL LaTouehcs affairs were, would make it their study to protract tlie business as long as pos¬ sible, especially as the heirs of M. La Touche were in captivity ; but, if any .. * person
person of consideration was to come as their representative, in all probability ifc woulel soon be settled. ' -This letter gave me much uneasi¬ ness. I hael not as yet heard from my family, though letter after letter" had been sent. My good master saw the misery I endureel, not only on my' own account, but on yours, and my tlear Gencvie ve 's. He saw the conflict, anel generously offered to go to Tan¬ giers, and take me and Genevieve with him. I fell at his feet in a transport of gratitude. You at this time were in the same insensible state, as when we hrst landed at Sallee. " This good man soon made prepa¬ rations for our departure. We reached Tangiera in safety ; but I will not at¬ tempt to paint the elistress of the clear Ci ene vie ve. For some weeks, we had F б every
every reason to fear she would be in the same state as yourself; but 1 leaven, at last, restored her to us, and, in four months, I had the satisfaction of find¬ ing M. La Touche's affairs settled, as far as they could then be arranged. A copy of his will had remained at Tan¬ giere. The will itself had been sent to Cambray, to a relation of his wife's. It appeared that he was, at the time of making it, ignorant of our intention of leaving Flanders, and Fate cut short his thread of life, before he % could be made acquainted with the misfortune that had befallen us ; for, he lived but a very short time after he wrote that fatal letter, which iaiel the found at toa for all the miseries you have suffered, " As soon as matters were arranged, we paid the benevolent Moor the mo¬ ney he had advanced for Genevieve's ransom and my purchase, antl hastened to
to return to Sallee, to procure your release ; but guess what was our grief and amazement, when we found that the captain of the rover had been cither killed, or taken prisoner by an English ship, which he had the temerity to en¬ gage; that the whole of the property had betu seized on by his brother, who had sold all his slaves, and was gone to Fez. We set about to make every enquiry about you ; but, after the most diligent «•ai eh, for two months, we remained in the ьцте state of ignorance as before. The poor Genevieve refused all com¬ fort, and would not be persuaded to leave Salice, till some intelligence had been obtained respecting yourself, or the dear boy. The good Moor, at whose house we resided, still continued his search. He offered liberal rewards to any one who should give any account of you, either dead or alive ; but all proved ineffectual. Wc, therefore, con¬ cluded
eluded you had died in the state in which we left vou, and that the child had been taken to Fez with the woman. Proper men were sent there to make the same enquiries, but no news coukl be obtained of either. "Finding it impossible to gai u any intelligence, I atlast succeeded in per¬ suading Genevieve to return with me to Flanders. I had not received a sin¬ gle line from my family, and I was iu hopes that I coukl previdi upon the dear girl to bless me with her hand, if I could once more get her amongst her friends. She at length reluctantly con¬ sented to go, and places were taken for us 'm a fruit boat, to carry us to Gibraltar, from whence we hoped to get a passage to some port of France. We left our hospitable protector with tears, under whose roof we had experi¬ enced more humanity than we ever should
should, liad a similar lot befallen us, among those who profess the faith of Christ. He assured us, at parting, that nothing shoukl be left undone by him to ascertain your fnte and the child's. We staid at Gibraltar three weeks, and then obtained a passage in a merchant¬ man bound for Bordeaux. "When we reached Cambray, we were u->tonfehed at the amazing altera¬ tion ve saw, not only on the domain belonging to my father, but that belong¬ ing to you. The places appeared to¬ tally changed, and, wheu we drew up to the door of the hotel, which nearly faceti my father's, I was surprised to »see two servants, who were strangers to me, in deep mourning, walk down the avenue, leading a child. Supposing ihem to be visitors to my friends, lieft Genevieve at the hotel, and walked up to the house. I had on a Moorish dress, and
and of course was not recognized. I asked for my father. 'He is dead,' said the servant—for my mother—'She is at Soissons*—for my brother—'He is deaeltoo; we яге now in mourning for hirn.' 44 A cold shivering seized me; I grew sick, and instantly fainreel. Tho-e thai were near conveyed me into a room, I soon recovered, and from the servants I un lersfooeî, that My father had died four months after my departure, of the small pox ; that my mother had not been in health since; but she had lived with my brother, till he had been kill¬ ed in a duel by an English gentleman, with whom he had quarrelled at the Opera, and that my mother, in conse¬ quence of this additional distress, hael lost her senses, and been confined, as she had lost her other son (mean ing me) sqmç time before, but noboely knew how
how, as he had not been seen for a long time, and it was supposed he was kill¬ ed ; for, a letter had come, to say he had gone on board a ship, and been taken by pirates. This incoherent ac¬ count induced me to ask Who was İn possession of the domain. They said, A nephew of my fathers, the very man I had addressed my letters to, and whom I had requested to make known my situation to my father ; but it was evident the treacherous wretch had ne¬ ver interested himself for me, but mean¬ ly, nay, inhumanly, suppressed my let¬ ters. My heart rose with quick resent¬ ment against the unfeeling monster.— 4 (io, tell your master to come to me immediately,' said I. 'What name shall we give?' said one of them. Der¬ went Vauciuse/ said I; 'I insist on seeing him.' ΊΊιο servants looked at me with amazement. 'How long has my brother been dead ? 1 I asked ; 'Some months,'
months/ said a woman servant. * And pray, how long has your master come here to reside ľ 'About n month, sir/ saitl ídie í *Tia well/ said I ; * and my unhappy mother is in confinement at Soissons : why was she taken so far from Cambray?' * I don't know/ an* swered the woman ; * there are many reports ; but I believe Madame made choice of that place/ 11 More discourse passed, but' my cousin came not I sent a second message; the man returned, saying His master was very ill, and was certain I could not be the person I pretended to be, as Derwent Vauclusc liad been dead above two years. ť Your master does not choose to scenic then/ said I. ť I should think so, sir/ replied he, I instantly left the house, and hastened to my Genevieve, to whom I imparted what had passed, I then sent for pro¬ per
per cloaths, and ordered a notary to be fetch¿d, who was used to transact busi¬ ness for my father, ami who I supposed was acquainted with every circumstance that had occurred. He was uneler many obligations to my family, and I did not doubt but he was the properest person to apply to. He came, and started at ьеепщ me; expressed hia astonishment at finding me living, and awkwardly congratulated me on my return. Ills embarrassment was evi¬ dent. I noticed it, and tokl him of it, asking Wiiy my appearance should so much discompose him. lie stam* mered something, but evaded giving the satisfaction I demanded respecting the affairs of my family. " Finding I could get uo proper in¬ formation from him, л elismissed him. and sent for Counsellor Paui>welk*, one who had the reputation of being an honest
honc*>t man. and he proved himself so to me. In about a fortnight, í had the satisfaction of seeing myseif allowed to take possession of my inheritance, anel to turn out a rascal, who had taken advantage of my miserable situation, suppressed all my letters, aud had it confirmeei that, not'only myself, but, all the family of La Touche, had per¬ ished, Their effects had also been taken possession of by the family to whom M. La louche had sent his will; but they gave us no trouble ; they im¬ mediately resigned to Genevieve all that had belonged to her father, and л your effects were placed in proper hands, to have them restored, if ever you, or vour son, should return to vom natne country. " As soon as all things were settled, the relations of my Genevieve prevailed on her to bless me with her hand ; buc not
not till I had the happiness of again seeing my mother. I had her removed from Soissons, anei, by the kimi atten¬ tion shoun her by every one, she was soon restored to reason, and the plea¬ sure she evinced on seeing me again gave me a satisfaction that heightened * every comfort. I was soon the happy husbanei ; but a cloud of sorrow hung perpetually on the face of my Gene- vies e, and she would often say— i Ah î Vaucluse, there is nothing now wanting to complete my happiness, but a know¬ ledge of Marlbro s fate. If we were sure he was dead, I woulel endeavour to he content; but, to he ignorant of his, and the dear boy's, at times makes nit· miserable. I think I continually see my dear lost Alaria, in her dying moments, imploring me to succour lier child, and to seek her husbanei. Ah ! how httle have I been able to perform either!' " We
" We had been married about two months, Milien I hail the happiness of hearing from the good Moor, who in¬ formed us he had, at last, the pleasure of hearing where to fmd you ; that he should immediately apply for leave to purchase you ; but he much feared he should not succeed, as the man who then owned you was at variance with him ; and the onlj- sure way to obtain your release, was sending sc.:*«.' person to purchase Christian slăvea ; and he had not the" least doubt, from the knowletlge he had of fhe man's cha¬ racter, that he u ould readily part with voti, as vou were but of little service to him. Genevieve wa** overcome with joy at this news. '' Now/ said she, 'I hope this is the prelude to finding the dear child.' I instantly proposed go¬ ing myself, to set you free, but deter¬ mined to get a proper protection from the emperor's consul, This I obtained, and
aud sailed directly, and, by the assist¬ ance of our good friend at Sallee, had soon the happiness of seeing you as vou now are. The other poor fellows you saw were those that were taken with you. One of them, I fear, iiili not live; the severity he has experi¬ enced will, in ail probability, put an end to his existence; however, what can be done to preserve him wiik' " Here Vaucluse ceased. I hael listened with the greatest attention to all he said. The death of my Maria, and the loss- of my child, sunk deep into my heart, and I made a resolution never to return to France, until I hael again seen my child, or, at any rate, got intelligence of his fate. Yet I wished to see Genevieve, to hear from her what the last moments of my dear, my tender wife, were ; but, if I went back to France, I thought, in all pro¬ bability,
bability, I should nms an opportunity of recovering my son. "I had not once thought of asking Vaucluse in what manner he came to be on board our ship ; but he told me, that On going to Paris with his family, he had made a request to his father, that he would permit him to receive the liand of Genevieve before her de¬ parture; but his father hail given a po¬ sitive refusal, and in consequence of that, he had hastened to the port of Havre, and agreed with tlie captain for his passage with us. He did not mean to make himself knoun to us, until our arrival at Tangiers : for that reason, he had kept himself in his birth. He had hired a strauge servant to at¬ tend him, leaving his own man at Pa¬ ris; but, upon the attack of the puâtes, he had hastened upon deck, which I had tliat moment quitted, and had fouiriit
HORRORS OF VENTOLIENE. fought with the sailors. His man had * been killed, the first broadside the ra¬ ver fired, and this excited him bo fury ; ì but, in spite of alt their efforts, the in-- fidels succeeded in boarding, and the man was struck over board, in the òp·** position that was made on tlieir first 4 gaining the deck, which - was .th®«*»^ ment when the captain fell lifeless at the feet of his conquerors. Seeing that, ' lie baid, he descended to us and the dreadful separation followed. "It was some weeks before I was well enough to think of moving; how¬ ever, I, at last, recovered ; but it was to misery. I told Vaucluse my intens tion of searching for my child ; he made use of every argument to dissuade me from it, but in vain. He returned to Flanders, with my companion ip sorrow, and I set offfbr Fez, furnished with letters from our Salìee friend toi Yol. II. G several
steŕat ^oplá, who, he thought, might assisi my j&èöreh» : I remained at that etfyt-aeaj! АШее months» and, notwith¬ standing every effort, itwas impossible for human invention to suggest, I could get no intelligence. Tired of my fruitless, attempts, I set off for Me* qumcží Teruari, Tangiers,- and Ceuta; ttesr to Grau, Algiers, Bono, Tunis, Susa and Tripoli. But notwithstand- ingthemosteliligeiit search at all those places, my wretched heart was doomeel to remain unsatisfied. "The night previous to my leaving TripoD, undetermined where to direct нгу steps, I met with a gentleman, who gave me some vague account of a chris¬ tian child, about the age of mine, and и French woman having been taken щ by atMaltese, in a little boat, with 4»e wouneled man in it, which boat, kfisaid, badbeioBgedtoa corsair that . t had
had been sunk by the Maltese, off the Isle of Cândia. Tlie ehild was in per-· feet health, but the woman had died within an hour after she was taken up* owing to a blow she had received in her breast. From the man they leavnt that the child belonged to their eaptain ; but who ' the woman was he did not know. As soon as the action commen¬ ced, they liad put the woman and child into the boat, and he had orders to ъЬесг off with them. As they lowered them into it, the splinter of a gun had wounded him, and struck the woman» but the child was not hurt He had obeyed his orders, but his wound bleed* ing fast, he could not row the boat. The woman, he said, fainted several times; and, when he saw the Maltese ship had conquered, he lay to, m hopes they would take them up, which, upon his making a signal, they âid%
GS
"This
u This account raised my spirits ; I was all impatience to reach Malta, where Heaver, in mercy restored my dear lost boy to his wretched father. I found it wae indeed my ehild, who had been so miraculously preserved, and I could not enough bless the in¬ terposition of Heaven. He had been taken under the protection of the knight that commanded the galley, who had placed him under the tuition of a Jesuit, with whom he lived in habits of intimacy. As soon as I ar¬ rived at Malta, I applied myself to the grand prior of the French commande* rie, requesting I might be permitted to see the child. My request was imme¬ diately granted. I told him my rea¬ sons, and, if it was my child, he would have a cut on the right side of his face, extending to the projection of the ear, which was cut quite through. My story was attended to ; I was heard with
with compassion, and, in less than an hour, I had the happiness of clasping the dear image of my lost Maria to my care-worn bosom. " Tö tell my raptures would be im¬ possible. I fell, in a transport of gra¬ titude, at the feet of his preserver. He was one of the most humane and ex¬ alted characters that ever drew the breath of life. He raised me up^— soothed my soul to peace. He ordereda Greek lady, who resided with him, to see that every thing comfortable for me was immediately procured. My ema¬ ciated frame stood in neeci of rest: that I obtained, and, oh ! my God ! what were my joys, when I lay down upon a comfortable bed, and saw my dear boy sleeping by me ! I could scarcely believe it real. I waked se¬ veral times ; I stretched out my hand, to see whether he was still by me ; G 3 thea
then I would catch up the lamp, anel hold it over him, ami view the infant traces of my Maria's face ; then thank my God, and try to rest again. " In this manner I passed many hours ; at last, I dropped into a pro¬ found sleep, which had lasted some time, when I was awoke by the dear boy's asking me leave to go to his preceptor. Accustomed to rise at an early hour, he had wai ed at his usual time ; but finding me asleep, and no one to dress him, he had lain down again ; till, afraid of being chid for being too late, he had ventured to rouse me. I arose, blessed my boy, and led him to his benefactor. That day, I related to the worthy man all that had come within my recollection, since the time I left Havre. He com¬ miserated my misfortunes, and felt for me as a brother. The grand prior and ihn
the whole of the order behaved to me with the greatest kindness. I con¬ tinued here a considcfable time longer than I intended ; for, I knew not how to leave them ; but, willing to give joy to the breasts of Genevieve and Vau¬ cluse, I at length detenu in ed to quit Malta. I had a passage procured for me anel my son in an English frigate that had touched there. I left those clear and valued friends with regret, but not without a promise that my son should one day return to bless them, when he was old enough to be truly sensible of the great debt of gratitude he owed them. * " I was landed by the frigate at Portsmouth, and immediately set off to the nearest port, of France. I reached Cambray in safety, aud had the superlative happiness, of being again in the company of those dear G 4 friends
friends, who had for some time given røe over for lost. They were almost frantic with py f Genevieve clasped the dear boy in her arms, and again and again related how she tended the wound he had in his face, and what agony she sufiered, when he was taken д from her to be placed among the chil¬ dren of the haram. His nurse died two ¿ays after his poor mother, who expired in convulsions, as the fits ne- , ver left her but for short intervals. From the time she dropped in the hold, to the hour of her death, she spoke, .Genevieve said, but very little, and that only to implore her to take care of her child, and earnestly to seek me. She was buried by some Christian slaves, as was the nurse; my child, Gevevîevé said, had been removed, and the maid servant, som etime pre¬ vious to her being ransomed by the good
good Moor, but she never could learn where they were taken. to.— Many a tear did I shed to the memory of a wife so dearly loved ; but religion, at length, softened my sor¬ rows. My son grew amazingly, and promised to make a bright figure in life. Genevieve and Vaucluse were happy ; they were blessed with two daughters. Vie kept up a regular correspondence with our good friend the Moor, and my friends at Malta. When my son was old enough, he ex¬ pressed a wish to enter the university. I did not oppose it, and he was entered at the Sorbonne. " I had long had a wish to take upon me the religious habit, and, when my boy became a student, I quitted Cam¬ bray, and went to Florence. I had a particular friend there, of the order of St. Benedict. I went to him ; his G 5 tenets
tenets of religion pleased me, though they were singular in their kind ; I embraced them v a»d> by a train of cir¬ cumstances too tedious to relate, I be¬ came a member of the society at Bono¬ ni: an aident desire to reclaim the members of this community brought me here, and I am in hopes, through the divine assistance, that I shall com* piete my design. "Thus, my young friends, have I given you," said the gooel old man, "a slight sketch of my liie and my reasons for being here, which I trust will answer my fowl «xpeci.ations." Fitzallan and the captain had listen¬ ed with the most car» est attention to all that the father had related, and so much had they been interested in his fate, that they regretted when he ceas¬ ed to speak.. They looked upon him¬ as
as ä beiııgof a superi0iior(l#·, sent, like a primitive saint, to rçclaiut the lost of God. His mode of reasoniu$ rşspect- ing the demons staggere<l theh faith щ the non-existence of spirits, små brought them to a resolution %> abieJe by his doctrine. Fitzaiîau,was det|?rini^!ed# whether mg^d to it or not, to try to be received a member at Boneni, and stea¬ dily to adhere to the system of father G rcgory. They thanked the good ma» in the warmest te.ms, for the recital he haţl given them, arid earnestly intreat¬ ed he wou lei receive thern as his disci* pies. Tears of pleasure glistened in the eyes of the father ; he met their öfters with heavenly benignity, blessed and received them as his children. The morning dawned; for, night bad fled iu conversation on rapid wmg$$ the philosopher and his pupüs had not heeded Uie lapse of time, The sun arose G 6 with
with resplendent histre, and darted ŕts glittering beams full into the room, before they could be convinced the »ight was past, and light had succeed¬ ed darkness ; such power has a virtu¬ ous man's conversation over sensible and intelligent minds. They arose and went into the park ; they strolled to the pavilion, then to that part of the palace which they had seen, as they thought, ou fire : all ap¬ peared the same as before; nothing was destroyed. The captain said, He had a wish to see in what manner the place looked above ; but father Gregory op¬ posed his ascending, saying: "Re¬ member tlie oracle/' They then return¬ ed through the vaulted passage, where 4hey heard the heavenly strains, as if diaunting a morning hyinm They listened till the sounds ceased, and pro¬ ceeded to the haJL Several of the com¬ pany
pany were up, and preparing for break¬ fast—Joseph was amongst them. Vash¬ ti, he said, was much better, but still persisted in thesame opinion respecting lier mother's spir i t . Father Gregory went to her ; he fouud the fever abated, but her mind strongly prepossessed with images of the phantoms. He tried to persuade her that her imagination was deceived ; but arguments and reason¬ ing were of no avail ; her mother's spi¬ rit was still before her, and she earnest¬ ly intreated father Gregory to tell Jo¬ seph, she was certain she never should be able to continue in the palace, or ever be at rest, till she had quitted it He was not, in one sense, sorry to hear her talk so, as he augured much good from it. He told her he would certainly talk to Joseph; but he wish¬ ed her to be reconciled to staying there, for the present, as it would be impossi¬ ble
ble for her husband, or herself, to go from there, till the return of the members then absent. He quieted her fears of seeing the spectres, and, at length, succeeded in persuading her to rest contented, till the members came home ; he then went to Michael. Here he found more difliculty than he thought, to reason him out of his fears. The poor fellow had awakened sooner than was expected, and, missing his master, had been so overcome ν ith terror and apprehension, that it was evident his reason was overturned.— Fitzallan came to him, but he knew him not ; if he remembered him for a moment, the recollection would vanish, and nothing seemed visible to him but the demons. This sight affected his master more than he chose to own ; he l&menteâ the loss of the poor felloivs reason, and earnestly intreated father Gregory,
Gregory, if he could, to devise some means for ids relief as he feared it might be attend ed with ñxed insanity. The father -assured him that nothing shoukl be wanting from him* that he could do or-procure, to be done*. Fitz¬ allan Continued in the room with him, for many hours ; but, notwithstanding he tried by every means in his power to make him sensible of his being near him, he found it impossible to make him comprehend the least idea. Three weeks passed, from this time, in constant attendance on the invalids. Vashti was recovered much ; but Mi¬ chael remained, though passive, abso¬ lutely deranged. Eveiy method that could be devised had been adopted, but all proved ineffectual. Fitzallan grieved for him, as for a brother, and earnestly wished for the time when hç should leave the palace, that he might have
have him put uneler medical care. The Tuesday after the third week, the cap¬ tain and he were together in the room where Edward slept, and were in earn¬ est conversation, respecting the doc¬ trine of father Gregory, whose pious soul appeared daily more visible. The longer they conversed with htm, the more they aelmired, approved his prin¬ ciples, and longed to imitate them.— The captain had just remarked how happy such a man must be at an oppor¬ tunity of doing good, when they heard the outer door of the gallery open, and the footsteps of a man approach the room they were sitting in. He look¬ ed at Fitzallan. "Who can this be r' said he; "did we not lock the door when we came in?" "Certainly," an¬ swered Fitzallan ; "there lies the key, with that of your room, which you put out of your hand, when you took up
up the bottle of medicine. Father Gre¬ gory, you know, is gone to his room. 1 ' At that instant the door opened,-and the form of Owen appeared before them, in all the horrors of his last moments. The blood seemed to stream afresh from his side. The face appeared again con¬ vulsed, and again the agonies of death, and terrors of eternity, were visible in his whole frame. They both started up, and involuntarily drew back, towards a table, on which lay Fitzallan's pistol. The spectre advanced. As they view¬ ed him nearer, he appeared more fragile, and to glide, instead of walking.— They kept their eyes steadily upon him, and he the same on them. The cap¬ tain laid his hand upon the table, but hael not power to take up the pistol. He turned to the figure, which seemed to take an oblique direction. "I conjure thee, unhappy man,** said
said he, "by all thy hopes of bliss, to tell me why thou hast left the chambeis of the dead in this horrid manner, to—" Before he could finish his interroga¬ tion, the outer door opened *a second time, and, in a moment, the form of St. Prie stood before them. He was úreufiá m criminals are, that suffer on the wheel ; the last struggle of expiring Bature wm quivering on his dying lip. The pale and ghastly visage struck ten thousand horrors into the hearts of Fitzallan and the captain, and they found themselves unable to articulate a word. They kept their eyes fixed upon the phantoms, and they as steadily re¬ garded them. Full two minutes passeei in total silence, when both the spectres, in a tone that shook their souis with terror, said-—
Bemem-
" Remember Bononi ; yet twice aiue days, and then------ ■** "And what their?" said Fitzallan, assuming courage. " The spirits of the damned will tell thee ; we can no more/ At this, a sulphureous flame enve¬ loped them both, and in it they va¬ nished. The captain, whose eye was riveted to that part of the room, said—«" Thia is too much ; I feel myself a coward ; surely the good father was afraid of this, when he bade us summon cou¬ rage, for what we were to see at Bono¬ ni : there I should have been prepared ; but for this I ivas not; Your temerity saved me from dropping ; it gave an instant turn to my whirling bram. -Was ever sight so dreadful ! Heaven send
send this hour at Bononi were past ! Much as I have thought upon a time that I know must come, I own I was not prepared for such a remembrancer as tliis. I must now firmly believe that part of the oath, which binds the takers to return dead or alive, to pre¬ sent themselves at the stated period/' Edward had stood fixed as a statue, leaning against the table, totally re¬ gardless of all the captain hael been saying; Starting from his reverie, he exclaimed : " Period !—what period ? Oh ! my God, what am I destined to see more ? Surely Omnipotence cannot permit any thing more terrifying, to distress a wretched mortal, than the two objects we have just now beheld. Yet twice nine days, and then - and what then ? The spirits of the damned will tell thee. Surely the spirits of the damned are those we have just now seen;
seen ; those that surrounded us in the pavilion did not so much unman me as these diabolical appearances. Yet twice nine day.., and ¿hen—we are to see them again I suppose. The hea- avenly powers forbid ! I had sooner meet a legion of the damned, or ten legion? of men opposed to my single arm, than see this sight again. WouVl to God the father had been here ! he would have got out of them what they meant. For my own part, I shall look upon myself as a woman, anel not a single spark of man about me, if I am to shrink thus from every appalling sight/' " Let us go to the father/' said Ed¬ ward, "and hear what he «ill say; but we must take care we do not en¬ counter them again in our way ; for, if we do, upon my soul, I shall run back. How is it I did not feel such a coward, when
when the ladies paid us a visit in the ruins, as I do now ? I know not whe¬ ther there is a peculiar charm about the drapery of a lady, or whether a petticoat possesses the art of stimulating our courage ; but this much I know, that, with them, I felt no terrors at all ; but with these I feel myseif as great a cowarel as ever turneel tail on the field of battle, and el am me if í Avon lel encounter them again, to be made Chan of Tartary. " Nor I, hy heavens ľ* said the cap¬ tain ; " but let us, however, seek fa¬ ther Gregory/' " I cannot think," said Eel ward, "of leaving this poor fellow here alone; 'tis a thousand tc one but these very diabo¬ lical fiends were what he saw, when í w^ from him ; and, if so, 'tis no won* det hi», reason is overturned, when it had
had received such a recent shock. For my own part, I cannot help thinking the whole palace to be the repository of the damned, and we happen to be here at the time of their Jubilee. Ah í father Gregory, well might thy righte¬ ous soul endeavour to reclaim the earth¬ ly inhabitants of this mansion, that they may quit it, anel leave the damned at free liberty to enjoy their revels. Ah ! poor Michael 1 how I pity thee ! I wish thou wert in dear Ireland again; there neither devils, witches nor reptiles, per¬ vade your steps, or interrupt your re¬ pose ; we may walk, sit, or sleep with¬ out any fantastic forms being conjured up to plry tbe devil with one." Tbe captain looked earnestly in the face of Fitzallan, and thought he ap¬ peared d ìsordered. He took h i m by t he arm—" Come," said he, "we will only go to the father's chamber, and desire him
him to come here, and then he will not be left alone." "True," said Edward. To descend to the part of the build¬ ing where the father s room was, they must of necessity open the doors they had heard the spectres open, and pass the little gallery, at which they had entered ; but this idea seemed to haye slipped from their memory. The captain took up the key, and unlocked the door, looking every way around for some other hideous form to glance by them ; but, nothing appearing, they went on to the father. He was amazed to see them at that time of night, and much more so, when they informed him of the reason, and related every particu- flar. He seemed hurt at seeing Fitzal- an so much affected, and went back^ with them to his room, as he thought he saw his countenance change rapid- iy*
HORRORS OF VENTOLIENE. îy ; but they had not ши down five minutes, and begun to reason on what had passed, before they heard the sound of a vast number of voices, and presently found the whole com¬ pany was returned from Naples. ТЫ$ surprised them, and the captain went down. Not one of them but was come back. As this was unexpected, he was at a loss to account for it ; but upon interrogation, he was informed they had received the first summons to Bononi, " How, the first summons r" said he ; " what mean you ?'* il We mean, sir/' said the lieutenant» ťí that we were summoned, nine days ago, to return here by this evening, and, in twice nine days more, to be at Bononi.'* " And what sumindns did you re¬ ceive? asked the captain, "ancl in Vol* IL H what
what manner was it delivered ; I have my reasons for asking you so particu- larly. ,> " If we were to tell you," answered he, "you would not believe us ; but I dare say the father will, if we inform him." " I will believe you,'' replied the captain, " say what you will."' " If so, 5 ' said the lieutenant," I will tell you. We had met at a house, near the royal palace, at Naples, as five of us had been at court that day, and been very successful. Captain Parlati and myself meant to be there again the next day, when four of our company came in, and said, If we all went to the Opera, that right, we should stand a chance to pick up something hand¬ some, as a new piece was to be per¬ formed,
formed, and the whole strength of the house was called İn to support it ; and as the court patronized the author, the theatre, of course, would be full of the iirst charactei s. We had no sooner decided on it, than we prepared to go. The whole of our party took our sta¬ tions in different parts of the house ; but, first, we agveed to wave all invi¬ tations we might receive, and sup to¬ gether. 4 ť At the hour appointed by us, we met, anel supper was soon after serveel up. We had taken it ; the cloth Was re¬ moved, and w r e were about to shew our different acquisitions, when, as Parlati turned round to speak to Price, close by his si ele, lie beheld the form of ( )wen ! and, on the opposite side, di¬ rectly facing him, stood St. Prie, in all the habiliments of death, Owen, with the blood streaming from his wound, II il and
and the most ghastly countenance that ever man beheld. Kot one at the whole table, but felt themselves less than women. The blood forsook my cheeks, r and I believe there was not one but what felt as great a terror as myself: none had the power to speak ; a'solemn silence, like the dead of night, succeeded the boisterous mirth that a moment before surrounded the boards and we all involuntarily turned our eyes upon the hideous forms, who seemed as intently to regard us. " One of the servants, at this mo¬ ment, entered the room with fruit. The instant he observed our singular attitudes, the terror visible in our countenances, and the dead silence that reigned, he imagined that, by the power of magic, we had been trans¬ formed into as many statues. Staring wildly round him, his eye encountered the
the dreadful visions; don π went the fruit, and, wild with terror, the fellow tried to leave the room ; but St. Prie, like a basilisk, had fixed his eye upon him, and the poor devil, unable, from fright to move to the door, fell senseless by the chair of Berdulo. Parlati, at that moment, either from fear or cou¬ rage, I know not which, asked Owen what brought Mm amongst us ; when, in a tone i/i voice that made us trem¬ ble, they bade us, in nine days, return to this place, and, in twice nine more, to be at Florence, where the damned would meet us and inform us farther. Then, in circling flames of sulphureous vapor, they vanished. The door was not opened, from the time the servant entered ý and, had they left it by that entrance, we must have seen it ; but, instead of that, flames, like those emit- ed from Vesuvius, appeared to envelope them. IÍ3 ťí To
" To tell you that all our evening's amusements were at an end would be useless ; not one amongst us but felt an anxiety, attended with a wish to be alone, though all dreaded to be so. We sat some time without the power to speak, attempt to take up the man, or call for assistance to do it. There he lay, and there sat we, wholly unable to move. At last, the fellow being want¬ ed, he was fetched. The door being opened, we had presence of mind to bid the man who came to fetch him, to lift the poor fellow up. He was raised, and we summoned courage enough to move ; but we found it a difficult matter to get him to life. W T hen we did, the strange grimace he made, and the terrors he exhibited, brought all the people in the house about us, asking ten thousand ques¬ tions, to all of which we knew not what to answer ; but, after the confu¬ sion
ston was over, and we could think up¬ on what was past, we agreed to obey precisely the injunctions we had receiv¬ ed ; in consequence of which, we prepared to return, and that has brought us home to night. The whole of the company can prove the truth of my relation, and the testimony of the poor frightened fellow will confirm it." " I do not doubt a syllable of what you have related," said the captain; " for, if you had said only yourself had seen it, I should have believed you, as I have seen them myself this evening, and so has the gentleman you left here. But we shall have many things to tell you o£ when the community meet, and the father is with us. I must now go to him ; he is waiting, with the gentle¬ man and his servant, in their apart¬ ment." The captain then returned to Fitzallan, and related what had past. H 4 "Now/ 1
"Now," said he, " I am convinced that what we saw was not imaginary ; what, father, is your opinion ?" "That Heaven, out of pity, " said the father, "for the depravity of human nature, permits those unhappy spirits to fre¬ quent their former abode, that the pow* er of the Almighty may be made mani¬ fest, and that it may strike conviction into the breasts ofthose men, who have frequently derided the power of God and hisangels, admitting only a passive Providence to regulate the ways of men. The appearance of those spectres will confirm what I have often laboured to make them believe ; that the air is fill¬ ed with myriads of fleeting spirits, who are continually hovering near every mortal, either to warn him against the commission of any crime, or violence, or to urge him on to acts that destroy his peace for ever.
"This
"This opinion of mine is neither singular nor romantic ; it has been be¬ lieved by philosophers of all ages and all climes ; it has been handed down to us from the most remote period of antiquity, and is confirmed by the Syrians, Egyptians, Greeks, and Ro¬ mans. Among the latter, the Emperor Julian, commonly called the Apos¬ tate, ranks the most conspicuous, anel not a single modern author of any emi¬ nence who did not profess atheism, but what has confirmed this opinion.— Among the English authors of the pre¬ sent day, who support my system, may be reckoned the great Milton, Addison, Boyle, Birchell, Littleton, and many others, who have written on metaphy¬ sical subjects. Add to these a vast number of German authors of no less celebrity, wiiose reputations will never die. It is in the power of Heaven alone to bring good out of evil, and, H 5 by
by the fall of a few of his creatures, to redeem others. The paths of good and evil are set before every one that draws the breath of life, and in this particular we are free agents. "But ifc must not be supposed, be¬ cause w r e are so, that Omnipotence is regardless of ou r actions; no, far from it, the power of God and his attributes are sucli, asto take in the whole scope of human nature. He knows our frail¬ ties ; he pitks our weakness, and, for that purpose, has deputed to every one a protecting angel, who watches and guides our steps, from the moment of our birth, to the close of our life. If the paths which we are destined to tread shoukl be set with thorns and briars, with cheering encouragement they sup,- port and strengthen us. Hope is ever in their train, and to the blissful seats of never-ending felicity they point con¬ tinua lly,
tinually. If a man, tired of his guide, presumes on his own strength, and, ruled by the effervescence of his pas¬ sions, rudely dismisses the, guardian a u gel from his care, a damned spirit, ever on the watch to catch a mortal without his guide, instantly attacks liim. He holds out to him, in the most alluring colors, the fascinating charms -of vice; the poor deluded being, eman¬ cipated, as he calls it, from the austeri¬ ty of virtue, eagerly embraces the cap¬ tivating wanton, and, in a delirium of destructive pleasures, dro\vns all re¬ membrance of former virtues. He is taught by his companions, in the first place, to ridicule religion andthe practi¬ ses of it, to laugh at all those who may by the force of conscience, be prevent¬ ed from committing a diabolical action; and, in the next place, to despise al L those who have reason sufficient to act upon moral principles.. II 6 " This,
"This grand step atchïeved, they soon acquire turpitude enough, to throw off all religion and dread of a future state, hy listening with rapture to the sophistry of the demons around him, who teach him That a man's con¬ science is the only hell he has to dread ; and, as to the idea of a saviour, it is a mere farce, invented by juggling priests, to scare fools withal : That the Al¬ mighty never created beings, however sinful their lives, however vile their actions, tobe doomed for those crimes to eternal misery : That it is inconsist¬ ent with the attributes of God, if there is one, to act on principles directly op¬ posite to his mercy and gooelness, and that it cannot be supposed he can be attentive to the trifling actions of in¬ significant man; they are too much be¬ low his notice, and to live and enjoy life on principles best suited to our incli¬ nations, is the only way we can pursue ţo
to live at all. If they are guilty of an action that is amenable to the laws, they smile and say— * My neighbours do the same, only they are more care¬ ful in keeping it secret, and so pass for good moral men among old women and fools, and by that means, obtain the character of a christian ; mere bombast all ; the priest that pretends to point the way to everlasting happiness is a greater hypocrite than those he affects to teach/ "Thus they divest a man ofall fear of a future state : he becomes worse than the beast of the field, and if civil laws did not restrain him, there is no action, however atrocious, no crimes, however great, but he is ready to com¬ mit, anel then soul and boely sink to¬ gether. As soon as a man has arriveel to this state of wickedness, the demons have sure anel certain hold, which they take sufficient care not to lose ; but, when
when the hour of death approaches, the sinner is sensible of the folly he has been guilty of, in dismissing the virtu¬ ous guide of lu\ actions. Devils behold his remorse; they triumph in his pangs, and gather round him with insulting taunts. They point out to him the good he has derided, and laugh at him for his credulity, in believing; antl, as he expires, lhcy snatch his soul to them, which instantly make an addi¬ tional number to the damned." "You are then/'said Fitzallan, of opinion that it rests with every man to be either happy or miserable in another state, antl it is our own fault if we do not insure an eternal felicity." "It certainly is," said the father; "there is an instance of that among the great men of your nation, who have, İn spite of every allurement, died good men. When he was upon his death-bed, turn- bg
iıı^· to those that were weeping round him.—"Behold ше," said he } "and remark with what peace a christian can die." A man, who firmly believes in a í uture state, looks forward with trans¬ port to the moment that shall divest liim of those trammels of clay, which hold the soul a prisoner. He pauts for emancipation and smiles at the ap¬ proach of death. It is not so with an irreligious man, who has in life boasted of his contempt of religion, proudly denied a saviour, and pluming himself upon his acquisition of philosophy, dared to act from what he calls the dic¬ tates of reason. Only view him on the couch of death, and see whether his soul is so ready to quit his clay as that of the christian. If there is in reality no future state of rewards and punish¬ ments, why eloes he start at death ? why, if we are to sink into final anni¬ hilation, does he dread to die. The man
man who has nothing to fear will glad¬ ly throw off a load of body that racks him with pain and torture, and not shrink from that which is ready to re¬ lieve him from all his cares. The so¬ phist may dispute, the atheist may de¬ ny, but his inmost thoughts confess there is a Goel, anel a punishment here¬ after, whieh he has to el read. "Observe the body of a gooel man, when the vital spark is fled ; the coun¬ tenance all mild, placid, and serene, bespeaks the soul at rest. View that of one of these boasted philosophers in the like situation; the contrast is strik¬ ing. The one you look at with tender regret, the other you start from with horror and disgust. I have had many opportunities of making these observa¬ tions, and have ventured to tell, from the apppearance of the inanimate bo¬ dy, what the being had been, whose soul
soul had a short time before given mo¬ tion to the sleeping dust. Do you both make the same remarks, as you go through life, and I will venture to pre¬ dict you ΛνϋΙ find what I have said verified. There is a remarkable instance of this taken notice of by the great Duke De Sully, in his mention of the uncommon death of the fair Gabrielle cľEstrées. I coulcl name a thousand instances, if there needed it, to support my assertion ; butcommon occurrences wilt furnish you with sufficient oppor¬ tunities for conviction. An ingenuous and good man lets not the most trifling events that ha ppen slip his observa¬ tion; he sees, lie attends, he reasons, and the sum of his reflections is, that the infinity of God is such, that the fmity of man cannot comprehend as he ought the immensity of his pow¬ er ; but he acknowledges him in all his works, and trusts to him for every good
good ; he feels his soul expanded, and exultingly exclaims í ' when this mor¬ tal being shall have put on immortali¬ ty, then shall í behold my ú od and worship him hi spirit and in truth/ "Often has my soul panted to be gone, and to quit this world of pain and misery ; but, when I have reflected for a moment, that, in all probability, I might yet live, to warn a fellow crea¬ ture from falling into the destructive snares of vice, or of being able to draw another from his evil ways, all selfish considerations have ceased, and I have again turned my thoughts to the worlel and its inhabitants. It was thoughts like these that brought me here, and, though a member at Bononi, yet I have presumed to act upon my own princi¬ ples, without as yet having recouise to spiritual assistance ; but I fear much I shall not be able to complets my dc-
*
sign
sign without it, as there are here many refractory beings» who have attained that pitch of vice, that it is next to impossible to divest them of it Often eloes my heart feel pangs for them, which they are unable to feel for them¬ selves ; and, when I have heard them recount instances of their wickedness and depravity, my soul has sunk with¬ in me. I am led to hope that the ap¬ pearance of these two unhappy men, added to what they will be informed of respecting the lake and the pavilion, will have more weight than all the ar¬ guments of the most able divines, or all the 'examples that the most perfect christian could set before them. It will tend at once to convince them of the truth of what I have often asserted, that the air is full of immaterial beings, who are constantly viewing all our ac¬ tions, and are privy to our inmost thoughts; but, whenever I have hint¬ ed
td at those ideas, I have been laughed at and regarded as a brainsick votary of religion, " I am led to think those two phan¬ toms will visit them again, before we reach Florence ; but I hope your reli¬ ance on your Geni will be such, as not to shew the least fear. You will receive no personal harm, and you may learn» by what I have just said, the necessity there is of shewing the contrasted ap¬ pearance of virtuous and vicious men, when visited by those whose souls wan¬ der in the world of spirits. I can ven¬ ture to say you will all be together when they come again ; if so, remember what I have enjoined you. You know my ш ten tions respecting the future hap¬ piness of those we are among, anr! I trust you ΛνίΙΙ not fail to aid me in it ; if I succeed, I shall think I have hved to some purpose, and you, my young friends.
friends, willlikewise find your account in it. Kecollect there is greater joy in heaven over one sinner that repent- eth, than over ninety and nine just per¬ sons that need no repentance/* The captain and Fitzallan both as¬ sured him that nothing should be want¬ ing on their parts to assist his design. Michael was by the father pronounced to he in that deranged state, as would require the aid of those tkat were par¬ ticularly acquainted with that disaster* ous malady. He shoukl, he said, pro¬ pose the next morning to have him conveyed to Naples, and placed under medical care ; and, a»their time would be but short at the palace, it should be done as soon as possible. Fitzallan hove a sigh for the poor fellow, and said he hoped there was a possibility of his being cured. "Certainly/' said the &ther, ť ť if he is properly treated, and
and that shall be my care; but you must be content to be separated from htm till we return here again, and I hope, by that time, his reason will be restored. Fitzallan assented, and they then descended to the great hall, where the whole company was assembled, lis* tening with the most profound atten¬ tion to the relation Joseph was giving of what had happened in their absence, the illness of Vashti, and her resolution to leave the place, which the others confirmed, and added likewise theirs to do the same as soon as their visit te Bononi was over. When Joseph had ended his narra¬ tion, which none had attempted to in¬ terrupt, the captain told them what himself and Fitzallan had seen that evening, and what the spectres had said, which appeared to have a great effect upon them. They all addressed
the fatlier, asking his opinion and what he thought was meant by it j to which he answered nearly in the same words he had made use of to the cap¬ tain. They paid the most profound attention to his reasoning, and appear¬ ed to coincide with his ideas. There were but three out of the whole num¬ ber what were not sensibly affected. These made a jest of the father's argu¬ ments, and said they were certain it was only a .chimera of the brain, and ail they had seen at home was only phantoms raised by the storm : for, if the house had really been on fire, there would have been some appearance of it afterwards, and it could no& be suppo¬ sed that fire, such as they represented, would go out of itself, or that the de¬ vils would be frightened away by mu¬ sic ; and, as to hell and all that non¬ sense, they would be bound for it not one there eould say they had ever seen it,
it, or knew whereabouts it was situ¬ ated ; and, for their parts, until they had seen Heaven and Hell, they should conclude there were no such places : they had too good an opinion of, and too sincere an attachment to, the good things of this world, and the pleasures it afforded, to fall out with it, or to give themselves any trouble about what place they were to go to bete er. It was enough for them to enjoy Hfe, whilst they had it in their power, and leave the rest to chance, which they did not doubt would do as much for them in the next world, as it had done for them in this, and that was all they should eveţ care for. " Then you think nothing of Owen and St, Prie% appearance," said father Gregory. " Not at all," one of them returned, "we were drunk, I suppose, when
when we thought we saw tnem, and I dare say you were no better." This was spoken by Price ; Parlati seconded it, then put his hand towards a goblet of wine that stood before him, and said, " So, here is perdition to all ghosts, devils and monks !" He was raising the glass Ь ..is lips, when a hand covered with blood took hold of his, and prevented his moving. lie saw it, and, with his other hand, endeavoured to remove it, when ano¬ ther hand more bloody than the for¬ mer grasped both his, and in the same momeut, the form of Owen stood be¬ tween him and Price, whilst that of St. Prie appeared at the lower end of the table, close to the side of the other, who had supported the same doctrine. The whole company rose up, excepting those three, and prepared to leave the Vol. II. I room ;
room; but father Gregory, who ob¬ served the extreme terror imprinted on their countenances, beckoned the cap¬ tain and Fitzallan to stay. They did ; but, before they had re-scated themselves, both the forms vanisheel. Price fell back in his chair, uttering a most dreadful oath. Parlati and the other sat motionless. Father Gregory requesteel the rest not to leave the ι oom ; they obeyed, though nith evident le- luctance. When Parlati was a little recovered, he looked round him with the greatest terror and apprehension, then at his hands, to see whether any of the blood was on them or not; but pretending to assume courage, he said: "Damn the fellow! what does he mean by com¬ ing to me in this manner ? who the devil sent for him here Ρ "No one, I believe/' said father Gregory ; "their appearance
appearance is not enough inviting ; your impious expressions, I think the most likely." Price spoke not one word ; but his countenance expressed the greatest hor¬ ror. Guiverat, (which was the name of the other, ) after a severe struggle with his feelings, fainted away. They were all instantly employed to restore him ; but it was some time before he recovered. When he did, Parlati, who seemed to forget everything, damned him for a cow-hearted poltroon, and said, the next time the dead rascal eiared to prevent his drinking what toast he choosed, he would cut him down with his sword. They all smiled \\ ith contempt on the braggadocio, as, notwithstanding >,nat he said, the tre¬ mor whicii pervaded his limbs was visi¬ ble to every one ; and, though he se¬ veral times turneel his eye to the goblet, Ι ϋ vet
yet he made no effort to take it in his hand. Fitzallan had narrowly observed him, and, turning to him, said: "Why don't you drink then ? for, Fm sure you want it." ťí How do you know I want it?" said he, looking fiercely at Fitzallan. u Because I think I should, ifl were in your place, and we ahvays draw conclusions from what we feel ourselves." " Probably so," said he, "and I feel your conclusion is meant as an affront to me " ťí Not at all," replied Fitzallan, ic l only wished you to shew your courage, since you say you will most certainly exercise it upon an immaterial substance. You'd bet¬ ter I tiiink convince us of it at once, as in all probability Owen is near yoa now. " Parlati involuntarily started up. ťí I know
know not what you mean/ 7 said he, " unless you have leagued with the de¬ vil to bring him here, " and he looked around with eagerness. " I thought, sir/' said Fitzallan, " you did not ad¬ mit of either devil, or God." "I am not disposed," an s wereel Parlati, "to enter into a controversy on such damn¬ ed nonsense as that, ancl shall beg leave to wish you a good night." So saying, lie rose up antl attempted to leave the table; but, whether he really saw Owen, or was afraid he should, was not known ; but, as he turned round, he started and r ell back senseless against the table, whilst tbeform of St. Prie glided through the room with great velocity. "We shall be familiarized to this soon/' saiel Price, "though it is a little disagree¬ able now," and his hands trembled with fear. Part of the company was engaged
in restoring Guivcrat, and the remain¬ der got round Parlati, but nothing could move Prize : he sat as still as his fears would let him, but the chair literally shook under him. He tried several times to take up the goblet, to drink, but, wivh the greatest terror, drew back his hand again, and gazed at Parlati. Father Gregory, vho had observed the motions of Price, desired him to go to his room, to f*tch a case of instruments that la/ upon *he table, that he might open a vein, as he thought neither of his companions would recove · without it. "I cannot find my wa/ thither/* said Price, <ť haveyounone about you ? I thought you generally carried them." ' ť I do so," said the fatlier, " but I hap¬ pen not to have them now, and, I be¬ seech you, go."—"I cannot indeed, father ; I feel giddy ; there is such a damnable smell of brimstone, my head runs round." "How can you feat brimstone.
HORRORS OF VENTOLIENE. 175 brimstone, or any thing else, when you see your two friends incapable of help¬ ing themselves ?"—"No matter for that ; ifyou had Owen so near you as I have, I think you would have been giddy too." " Be it so/* said the cap¬ tain ; " I will fetch them, father j" and he immediately went and brought them. They opened a vein to each; but it was a considerable time before they reco¬ vered. Price shook with fear, at every mo¬ tion made by the wind on the stairs, which were near where he sat. He would turn his eye on Parlati, then on Guiverat, and then rapidly return it towards the wine, for whicii he longed, but had not courage to taste, lest his hand should be arrested as Parlatľs hael been. When the blood began to run, they soon recovereelj and Guiverat de¬ sired they would assist him to bed. I 4 Parlati
Parlati opposed it, saying, He would rather sit up ; at least, he should not like to go to bed till he was drunk- i( Why not for once/' said Price, "go to bed sober? for, the devil take me, if I would touch a glass more to night, though I am confounded dry at this moment" "But I will drink," said Fitzallan, "anel I daresay the captain will likewise. " " Certainly, " answered he, and immediately drank to the com¬ pany. This put Price in spirits'; the captain handed a large goblet e>f wine to him ; he accepted it w ith great rea¬ diness. "Ican take it from your hand," said he, "and, when I venture to de¬ ny the devil again, may he serve me such another trick as he has done my friend. He drank heartily, then filled it and offered it to Parlati. At first, he refused it ; but, being urged, he desired it might be held for him by the captain, as he could not hold ii himself
himself on account of his arm. They pretendeel to believe what he said, and held it to him, though it was evident his fear overcame his strength. Gui¬ verat made the same request anel pre¬ cised ν from the same motive. When the wine began to operate, they threw off their terrors, and joined in conversation ; but their eyes were continually wandering about the room. At last, one of the company askeel Par¬ lati What made him faint away, it was so much like a woman ! li I know not," answered he, "but I believe it was owing to a sulphureous smellthat siirrouneleel us, as that devilish figure made its ap¬ pearance. " G ui verat asserted the same, tliough it was not observed by the rest of the company. A long conversation ensucel, respect¬ ing what ¿they had seen ; but, as the I 5 wine
wiue got into their heads, they grew courageous. The captain then propos¬ ed their going to bed, which was ac¬ ceded to and they departed. The fa¬ ther, bidding them good night, said he would recommend to Parlati to have less confidence in his own courage, and more in what he had said to him. To this he made no reply. The three heroes, however, had not sufiicient te¬ merity to go to their different apart¬ ments ; but with one consent, betook themselves to the same room, and there, without undressing, laid themselves down to rest; but not till they had lighted up"candles enough to illumine the. whole choir of an abbey, wisely concluding that the more light they had, the less inclination supernatural beings would have to visit them. Fitz¬ allan and the captain had the curiosity to watch them, and highly entertained they were with their cowardly boasting, till
till they lay down, and then they retired to their own rooms. Fitzallan regarded his poor servant with pity ; he tried to make him sen¬ sible of his being near him, but he was wholly regardless of every thing. Pas¬ sive to the last degree, he took every thing that was offered him, but never attempted to move from the bed. One of the people had been left with him, and continued in the room during the night. In the morning, the captain came and said Parlati was in a high fever, owing, they thought, to the large quantity of wine he had drank ; and Price and Guiverat were not much better; for, they were playing all man¬ ner of antics. Parlati was praying, raving and cursing, by turns. Price busied himself in running about the room, in the greatest terror, as if pursu¬ ed by something; and Guiverat sat I 6* fixed,
fixed, as if chained to the bed, making the most horrid grimaces, throwing out his hands, as if to keep something from touching him, and then trying to repeat his paternoster; but it was so long since he had learnt it, and had made so little use of it since, that he seemed to remember but very little of it * " Your account of Guiverat, " said Fitzallan, " puts me in mind of an old reprobate, that lived near my father's, who was exactly the character of' one of those ; always boasting of his cou¬ rage, and contempt e)f every thing that related toa future state. This man my companions and I had taken a violent dislike to ; and, one time, when we were from college, at the vacation, wc determined to put the old fellow's cou¬ rage to the proof, and see whether he was as regardless of God and the devil as
as he pretended to be : for which pur¬ pose, we got the head of a dead ass, into the eyes of which we put some pulvis fulminans ; the mouth we stuck wide open, and filled it with wet gun¬ powder, among which we placed some India crackers ; the outside we pitched, and in the ears we put two pieces of candle ; we then washed it ail over tutli phosphorus, and fastened it to a bullock's chain. " He was much affected with the gout, and frequently sat up for days together, in a large chair, before the parlour fire, from whicii he was inca¬ pable of stirring, unless moved by his servants. During one of those fits, we took advantage of a very stormy night, the latter end of December, when he iras in a violent paroxism of pain and rage, to mount a ladder, and, from the top of the chimney, three of us let down
down the head, while the rest watched the fuu below. Those that were upon the top were to make use of several unintelligible woreb, and draw the head up and down occasionally. Up wc mounted, and down we sent the head, just at the moment when he had broke a decanter over the head of his servant, and was fervently sending himself, the poor fellow, anel his whole family pell mell to the devi L On the first letting down the head, it happened to re\st on a curve of the chimney ; but a sudden jerk of the chain precipitately sent it souse upon the fire. The phosphorus instantly caught and the head display¬ ed a most terrific appearance- We a- museel ourselves by drawing it up and letting it down, the old man making all the efforts in his power to get from his seat, all the while praying 'Our Father which art in Heaven—Mary, Alary, the devil's a come*—He coukl not
not proceed a word farther in the Lord's prayer. Some of the servants entered ; they were as much frİghteneel as their master, and, in spite of all his prayers and entreaties to them, not one would advance to move him from the spot; and, when they heard the explosion from the pulvis fulmináns, and repeat ed elischarge of the crackers, they all quitted the house and ran in the great¬ est disorder towards the town, alarm¬ ing every one they met, anel in a short time there was a rabble rout of some hundreds, making towards the house, the olel man all the time praying as fai¬ as 'Our Father which art in Heaven,' but no farther could he proceeel, anel the prayer ended in 'Mary, Mary, the devil is come.' "When we found the rout approach¬ ing, we thought proper to descend, luele the lackier and join them ; but, when
when we entered the room, though wc could hardly bear the stench of the va¬ rious combustibles with which the head had been decorated, we could not help being nearly convulsed with laughter, at the grotesque appearance of the del man. In his fright, he had contrived to raise his legs upon tbe table ; his bottom remained in the chair ; his night-cap had fallen off, and some of' the light stuffand paper whieh held the gunpowder hael been blown out, and pitched upon his head ; the table, and all round the fire place was covered with it. The perspiration was running from him in copious streams, while the fire ashes, which the explosion had forced over him, had begrimed his face, heael and cloaths, m a most luxuriant manner. His mouth was full of dirt, his teeth chattered, and his whole ap¬ pearance bespoke at once the greatest terror and confusion. "We
ť £ We all pretended to be as much frightened, as those that were ignorant of the truth. * Good Goel ľ said one, 'this comes of denying God and the elevii. Lorel help mc, sir, did I not always tell you, that, when you were wishing yourself at the eleviľs, he ac¬ tually would come and fetch you away one time or other ? Well î now, I hope you will have better thoughts.' i Aye,' saitl another, 'if he could but have prayed in the Lord's prayer, the devil would have gone away, anel not staid to make all this dreadful dirt, and rout, and coveicd you all over with filth. Lorel help me, if you hael not been such a reprobate, this would never have h ι ppen ed.' "Whilst they were pouring upon him iheir rebukes, he was imploring tnem to move him away from where he \\л\ and he would be sure in future lo learn
learn to pray. He religiously kept hi* word, and, from that time to his death, which happened about two years after, he was never known to mention the name of the devil. We all of us kept the secret, till he died, and then we mentioned it. From that occurrence, I have ever since been led to conclude, that those vho pretend to be the least afraid of hell, are in most danger of it, and that is the case with those three. There is so^eching particularly bad, I think, in Price and Parlati ; were they the particular friends of Owen?" "Yes," said the captain; (i but I think it would be best for the father to go to them ; it will be a very unfortu* nate affair to have this man taken to Bononi, in a state that will require great attention being paid to him ; besides, he is one of those that must declare whicii party he will attach himself to. This
This year, I am informed, is the grand inauguration, which is once in three years ; but we will fetch father Grego¬ ry." They went, and found hím with Vashti, who had foolishly enough been informed by Joseph of what had been seen the last night. The &ther found it a very difficult matter to persuade her to stay till Michael was sent away, but she at last consented. fhey then went to Parkďs room. and found them all three more quiet, except Price. The father said, that nothing material was to he apprehended, as the fever, he thought, would sub¬ side, when the fumes of the wine were evaporated. ** Price was swearing, iu a most diabolical manner, at Parlati and Guiverat, almut something known only to themselves. The father desired they would all betake themselves to rest, as they seemed to >rant it, and the shortness
shortness of the time thev had to stav at the palace would not admit of their trifling, there being so much for them all to do, as the accounts must be set¬ tled for some days previous to-their de¬ parture. " You may talk what you please, father/' said Price; "but, if I am to be haunted by that damned Owen, 1 shall not be able to do any thing.'' "I thought," said the cap¬ tain, "vou had, by this time, chased away such idle visions from your head. Surely you have slept since." " Yes/' answered Price, "slept, with a ven¬ geance : the devil take me ifl sleep here again, to be waked out of my rest by that cursed hideous-looking lascai, chasing me about. Why does not lie stick close to Parlati ? What does he want of me? He knows very well it was his eloings ; I only advised him to do it; but I did not assist." "Assist at what ?" asked the captain sternly. " Xo
* ( No matter wliat, " said Price ; ť ť 'twill all come out, I suppose, when we take our journey." Neither Gui verat, nor Palati, spoke one word ; but it was evid mt they feared something. They were, atlast, prevailed upon to go to beri, and told that when they were wanted they should be called. The captain, the father, and Fit/allan, went, as soon as break¬ fast was over, to prepare for Michael's being removed, as well as poor Vashti. They were both sent off that evening, under the care of Joseph, and five of the community, who were to return immediately, as soon as they were placed tinder proper care, and Vashti was reconciled to Joseph's leaving her. They came back in five days. Price and the others were employed in getting every thing ready for the distribu-
distribution of the lots, the tenth of which was regularly set aside for the church. They had not been disturbed by any appearance, since the night of their return. In the morning of the ninth day, the whole of the property, as divided into shares, had been taken into the great room, for each one to take his separate allotment of what he ivas to have, before the whole was con¬ signed to the general mass, to be dis¬ posed of at Naples, for the general good of the community. It was be¬ tween one and two at noon ; the whole of the company were present. The portion belonging to Owen and St. Prie were placed by themselves, and were to be added to that appointed for the church. The day was fine and se¬ rene, and they were about to order the whole of it to be packed up, and got ready for removing in the evening, when the doors that led from the south wing
wing of the gallery were heard to open, and fasten again with great violence. The sky began to be overcast, anel every appearance of an approaching storm succeeded. The noise of the different doors increased ; the thunder rolled at a distance; the room they were in became dark by the impending clouds ; the rain poured in torrents ; viv'ul flashes of lightning followed each other in quick succession, and the whole fabriek began to tremble. The eaptain proposed to leave the room and go into the park ; but itwas opposée! in the most strenuous manner by the members who were present at the pavilion scene. The storm appeareel to be more violent by far than that they had experienced before. The thunder, whieh was at first at a dis¬ tance, now broke over them with ter¬ rific violence. A tremendous crash ivas heard.
heard, as if the whole of the building was tumbling to its base. Blue sul¬ phureous flames descended in columns down the stairs ; in a few moments, the whole room appeared one vast sheet of liquid fire ; groans that pierced the air and filled every soul with horror were heard approaching. " I can no more/ 5 said father Gregory; " this is more than human nature can sustain, and not be certain from whence it pro¬ ceeds. I will go and be satisfied ; those who have nothing to dread follow me. " Very few indeed were disposed to do this. Fitzallan, the captain, two Nea¬ politans, and a Swiss gentleman, arose to go. They advanced towards the stairs — the groans increased. They attempted to ascend, but were violently opposed by some invisible hand. "In the name of that God, whom I worship and
and adore/* said the father, " I will go." He was preparing, with his com¬ panions, to ascend, when the dreadful group of demons they had seen at the pavilion descended in wild uproar down the stairs. From this horrid sight, even father Gregory drew back ; but, with great presence of mind, advanced to those at the table, and bid them trust in that God, who alone could preserve them tiom every danger. He lifted his hands to Heaven, and earnestly entreated its protection. The demons chased w ith whips the forms of Owen and St. Prie around the room., Three times did they go this hellish circuit ; then stopped at the lots that were set a- part for the church ; they instantly began to scatter them to all parts of the room í one minute, it would appear as if sheets of fire were consuming them ; the next, the fiends would seem to dmg Owen and St Prie through the flames, whilst Vol. IL К their
their backs were lacerated with stripes ; the gimas that issued from their lips, as the demons esercisce! their cruelty, fent the hearts of all present. Twice three ti mes more, in sheets of üre, they chased the wretched victims around the room, while the thunder, in ten¬ fold fury, shook the fabriek to its foun¬ dation. This done, they asceneled up the stairs in the same tumultuous man¬ ner as they had descended. It iras a considerable time, before 4?ven the fatherwas capable of speaking. He offered up fervent thanks to Heaven, that none had received any personal injury ; then intreated them to enelea- vour to recover from their alarm, and immediately prepare to leave tlie place, to which, he said, he hoped not one amongst them would ever feel a wish to Ш&те, sineehewas certain that the Al¬ mighty, justly offended at the crimes which
which had been committed there, wise¬ ly thought it was only a fit résidence for the damned. They all watfomly agreed in the same opinion, and said they would instantly prepare to depart, whenever he should be ready to com¬ mand them. The moment the nenas bad left the room, and the groans were no longer heard, the thunder ceased ; the sun « again put forth its cheering beams, and all nature recovered from its former mild serenity Each, encouraged by returning light, ventured to observe the room, not doubting but that every thm«' had been burnt, even to ihe cloaths they had on ; but, on exami¬ nation, not a single article hatl received the slightest injury; all was in the ъатс position as when they were first alarmed ; and, though they had, as they imagined, seen every thing pa$s K Í2 through
through the flames, yet not a single article was injured» This circumstance surprised them ; for, it was impossible that all should be deceived. Parjati, Price, and Guiverat, repre¬ sented statues of despair ; they had not spoke one word, but gazed with distracted looks towards the stairs. The father and the captain awakened . tliem from their stupor, by taking a haud of each, and asking why they were more affected than any one else, especially as they had so often spoke so Vehemently against supernatural ap¬ pearances. No answer was made by either. Parlati burst into tears, and sobbed like a woman. Astonishment sat on the features of every one ; they all forgot their terrors, and crowded round liim. He wept bitterly for some time ; then, turning to tlie father, he said: "Have you not promised to those
those tliat repent, pardon and forgive¬ ness?*' **I have/* answered father Gregory ; " I bear the commission of a dying saviour to do so, provided the penitent confesses his sins, and, with an humble and contrite heart, kneels and supplicates for mercy, before the throne of the most high God. To the prayers of such his ears are ever open, and his hands are ever extended to succour and preserve them." " But, perhaps," said the unhappy wretch, " there are crimes committed by man, which to forgive would call the justice of God in question, if there is such a being as a God." " To doubt * is being," replied the father, " would be impious indeed, and I can scarcely believe there are men capable of sovile a crime : whatever they may utter with their lips, their hearts acknowledge a God, vriiose power no human being can К 'J ^ ith-
withstand." (ί I believe it, father," said he, while the tears paccel each other down his cheeks ; " oh ! if there is mercy to be obtameel^ teach me, in pity, teach me how Ι ζφ§11 attain it ; for I have sinned, greatly sinned, anel I fear there can be no mercy left for me." " Why fear itr" said the good man ; íť if you sincerely anel truly repent of your sins, though they were as scarlet, yet shall they be as white as snow. Turn with sincere penitence to the foot- sto<)l of the eternal Being who called you into life; make a full confession ->f your sins, with a firm resolution to offend no more ; and I have not the least doubt, when the Almightv God js convinced that your penitence is sincere, that he will pour the balm of comfort into your wounded heart, and hid your troubled spirit be at peace. ' f " Hear
** Hear me then, fÄtliei'/* said Parlati, "iu the presence of men, and i u tlie presence ofthat Ge>d, whom I liave so often derided, hear me make a confes¬ sion of the blackest crimes, "I was born at Rome ; my father boasts his descent from a Patrician fa¬ mily, under the reign of Tiberius. He prideel himself more ou this, than the great wealth he possessed, i was his only child» and, as such, received an education suitable to the rank I was to hold in life. Indulged by my parents to excess, before I had attaiuetl my fifteenth year, I wus capable of exe¬ cuting any thing, however batl, that would tend in any shape to gratify my passions. Complaints were frequently brought to my parents of my enormi¬ ties ; I received a partial chiding, anel it was thought of no more. At seven¬ teen, I went with my family to Venice, К 4 to
to be there during the carnival Lf this place of riot and debauchery, I became an adept in every species of vice. I had not been there above a fortnight, when I caused a young gen¬ tleman, whose sister I had seduced and abandoned, to be assassinated, because he threatened revenge. A short time after that, I got acquainted with the wife of a merchant, the mother of five children. She pleaseel me; I maele her offers; they were rejected with con¬ tempt Tired at a repulse I did not expect, I soon found means, through the contrivance of an Englishman, of the name of Sarei, who, in his own country, was what they calían attorney, to get the merchant confined, under a feigned action for debt. A man fit for my purpose, he soon procured, and the debt was sworn to by him. The wit«; was placed within my power; biit, con¬ trary to my expectation, she rejectee! ali
all my offers, spurned me withdndig- nation, and threatened me with the civil power. "Enraged to madness, at finding myself disappointed, I hastened to con- Milt the wretch that had advised the measure. Hardened in wickedness? him¬ self, he soon found the fellow he had employed, ready to do every thing he shoukl propose, lie advised to have all their property seized on, and bold, and to turn the children helpless into the street. It was done ; I caused a report to be circulated that the mother was gone to Fiance with a gentleman. This was conducted in such a maimer, as to gain general belief. The children tied to the prison, to their father, wbo, overcome with this accumulated kiisc- ry 7 sunk under it, and, in two days af¬ ter, breathed his last. Tbe wife, through the ofíiciousness of one of the people К 5 that
that attended her, was informed of the whole; and, when I came to her the next day, after upbraiding me with cruelty, and every epithet wiiich my villainy deserved, she darted towards the door. I geit between her and it, when, with a quickness that beggars all description, she struck me down anel effected her escape from the house. She new like lightning through the streets, till she reached the place where her husband had been confined. ** Here she found a confirmation of her sorrows. Her children, the eldest about thirteeu, hael been taken in, out of. charity, hy a gentleman who knew the* father and valued him. To this gentleman's house she went ; but, in¬ stead of being received as an oppressed and virtuous woman, she was treated withithe utmost contempt. She IL· ten¬ ed -with composure to what they said r but
but the manner in which she was treat¬ ed roused her spirit, to regaid them with that disdain with which <hey treated her, and she requested to have the children restored to her, scorning to owe an obligation to a man, who eould listen to reports propagated by her enemies, without once examining whether they were true or false» She received her children, and, without a «single place to lay her head in, or mo¬ ney to procure a morsel of bread, she waudered to a distant part of the town, where, in an obscure bouse, she ob- « tained a lodging. " The next day, she went to several of her acquaintance; they all shunned her, and, at night, she returned in tbe greatest misery. Tlie woman of the house observed lier distress^ as she en¬ tered, and, with great humanity, asked whether she could lender her any scr¬ ìi 6 \ ice.
vice. The manner in which she ad¬ dressed her spoke comfort to her wounded soul, and, without any dis¬ guise, she imparted to her, her real situa¬ tion. The poor woman, who had felt the keenest distress herself, pitied anel consoled her ; advised her to place her hope in God, and wait the rest, and not to grieve, but exert herself for her children ; and, if she was willing to îearn to manage the raw silk for the weavers, she would procure for her as much as herself and the three eldest children could do. The offer was em¬ braced, and, in two days, she cernipre- hended enough of the business to at¬ tempt to work for the traele. The children soon acquired a knowledge of it, so as to be able to gain more than was expected, In this manner she de¬ termined to continue, till the return of her brother from the West Indies.
*Пг*
ť * In the mean time, my faithful emis¬ sary was not remiss in his search after her; but, having gone to an obscuie part of the town, bearing another я ame*, anel never being seen out, she eluded his vigilance. The merchants at Ham¬ burg, with whom her husband had con¬ cerns, were at last apprised of what had happened to their correspondent, and directly addressed a letter to the Eng¬ lish consul, stating their surprise at the transaction, and saying they had considerable effects belonging to the merchant in their hands, and advised him to set on foot an enquiry, respect¬ ing the legality oť the demand, as the gentleman alióse name had been made u*>e of to complete the diabolical scheme, was wholly unacquainted with it ; for, instead of the house at Venice bein» о indebted to them, tlieirs was indebteel to him ; and, as there was a great mys¬ tery hung about the whole transaction, he
he wished him to investigate it for the sake of the children» ie As soon as the consul received the letter, he applied to the courts of law, to obtain particulars. From thence he learnt, that a notary belonging to the mercantile court had, under bond se¬ curity, taken possession of the proper¬ ty belonging to the merchant, and disposed of it for his employer. The necessary documents authorising such sale were shewn him. Satisfied thus far, he went to the notary. From him he learnt, that what he liad done was by the instructions of Savel, vho pre¬ tended to be agent of the Hamburg merchant, and every thing he had done was by his advice ; the same man had, as agent, received the monies arising from the sale of the effects. The mer¬ chant, he said, had he lived, would no doubt have &оод settled the business! but
but he was taken off so quick, that it was supposed he had some poison given him, as the people of the house where he elied said he looked as if he had. This report was true, as Sarei had cau- seel it to be given him by a jew, whom he had bribed for six ducats, the day after he was contmed. This stratagem he exulted in, as it secured him from detection. I furnished him with mo¬ ne ν to do it. "Theconsul, upon this information, eauseel Sarei to be apprehended, at a time when he thought himself secure, and wlien he was busy iii a scheme to find the laely out. I heard of it with¬ in an hour after he was taken, anel not doubting but he would implicate me, I fled. The event justified my fears; lie was no sooner apprehended, than he accused me as the person who had em¬ ployed him ; anel, notwithstanding he had
had himself siiggesteel the means of putting the lady into my power, and taking her husband, yet he laid the whole blame on me, in hopes to obtain a pardon ; but, as the affair made much noise, and rewarels were offered to ap¬ prehend me, or any accomplice, the jew, to obtain the reward, and under a promise of pardon, discovered the truth of his being employed by Sard to administer the poison, which he hael done. As soon as the evidence of this fellow was known, the accusation of me was but slightly attended to. Sarei suffered upon the wheel, and the jew was sent to the galleys. The lady and her children were not discovered till some months after, when thev weie restored to their possessions. When I found the search after me was given up, I ventu red among my fr ien els agai n ; no notice was taken of me, and I went on in the same career as before. "About
"About a year after this, I saw at an assembly, in Florence, a lovely young woman, who, I learnt, was soon to be united to an Englishman of good family, who was recently returned from abroad, where he had been for some vears. The match was made to unite two families, whose sole heirs they were. I saw the gentleman several times ; I envied his approaching hap¬ piness, and racked my imagination to invent something that might protract their union. He was one of the most accomplished and deserving of his na¬ tion. His parents regarded him with ethusiastic fondness, and looked forward to this marriage, as the sum¬ mit of their happiness. I had planned many things; but they all failed, and the more I saw of the lady, the moie determined I became to possess her. At length» an opportunity offered, that bid luir to crown my wishes, "The
"The day was approaching, that was to give happiness to aH but me. The gentleman was hiring several ser¬ vants for the occasion; among the xeåt, he wanted one for himself. A thought struck me, that if I could dis¬ guise myself, so as not to be known, I might, through ray own recommenda¬ tion, obtain the place myself. The thought was no sooner suggested, than I set about to accomplish it. I told the gentleman that I could recommend him a man, whose fidelity I would an¬ swer for. I was desired to send him. My dress nas such as prevented disco¬ very ; I wns hii ed, and ordered to take my place in three days. Iu the mean time, I gave out that some ven· parti¬ cular business called me to Vienna; í took leave of the family, and at the appointed time, entered on my service, I had no fixed plan to pursue, any far¬ ther
ther than being determined to hazard every thing, rather than see them uni* ted. " The first and second day I passed in the most painful anxiety of what to fix on ; a thousand schemes crowded on my brain, which were dismissed as soon as formed. I was awkward at my business; but that amiable man excused me, saying he hoped I should soon get more expert. As the day drew nearer, I became like one mad. At last, an idea rushed like lightning on my mind, and I resolved to execute it. This was no less than to"dispatch my master, reassume my own character, and marry the lady; but I determined not to put the first part of my design into practice, till the morning fixed on for the mai riage.Theday previous to it a large par cy of friends меге assembled at the hotel of the Judy's father, where my η ; ai-ter
master was to steep that night, I plan¬ ned every thing in my head, antl re¬ solved to trust no one with my design. At the hour of rest, the gentleman de¬ sired I would awake him early, and prepare every thing belonging to his dress, before I went to bed, which I obeyed. Inthe morning, though deter¬ mined to efieet my purpose, I found I had not courage to enter his room till rung for, when, as if roused by a sud- áeà impulse, I snatched up a brace of pistols, properly loaded, threw his linen over them, and entered the room. * I thought/ said he, * I had desired you to call rae eat ly.' * You did sir/ said I ; *but it is indeed early enough now.' *Give røe my linen/ said he, and he saised himself up in the bed. I hand¬ ed it to him with one hand, and with the otlier fired the pistol The ball went through his heart, and he instant¬ ly fell back. I placed ţbe discharged pistol
pistol in his hand, and laid the other on his pillow ; then sprung like light¬ ning from the room, and gave the alarm. " The gentlemen then in the house crowded to the apartment; care was takeu to keep the lady from being in¬ formed of the catastrophe, and I ap¬ peared in all the agonies of grief. I was interrogated; my answer was, That, as I entered the room, my mas¬ ter asked me for his linen. I went up to the bedside, to assist him in putting it on, when he drew a pistol from under the pillow, put it to his breast, and fired before I had power to prevent him. My story was believed, as the pistol was found in his right hand. Every idea lhat could be formed for his being guilty of so rash an act was canvassed over and over again ; but they could fix on nothing more than that
that some prior engagement had urged him on to do it, as he thought he could not recede with honor from one so long since entered into, as that with the lady he was to have been that day united to. Means were found to reconcile her to the loss she had sustained, which was set down to his want of a proper affection for her ; but his parents never recovered the shock they hael received, and both fell vic¬ tims to their love for him,—the mother, in less than three months,—the father, six weeks after. L T poti my being discharged, a few days after fhe funeral, the whole of my masters cloaths were given to me, ami one year's wages. In his cabinet was fomui the picture of the lady; that was also given me, and I left the house, elated with the success of my scheme, »ot İn the least doubting but* I shouM be
be equally 1 happy with the original, when time shouiel have blunted the first transports of her grief. I easily found a purchaser for e\ ery thing that had been given me, and hastened to take, upon me my own character. " Aß soon as this was done, I went to pay my visit of coııeîoleııce ; I was received as before, and flattered myself that a short time would enable me to make m} r intentions known ; my fa¬ mily and fortune were such as would not be rejected, if I gained the affec¬ tions of the lady. Near seven months elapsed, before I coukl venture to make an offer of my hand, when I hael the mortification to imd it peremptorily refused, she eh using to remain single, I found it impossible to see her, as she persisted in receiving no company. Tired out with fruitless attempts, I quitted Florence, and again ventured to
to Venice, but stayed not tliere ; I went to Naples. Here I entered into every excess, and attached myself to a set of young men, as abandoned as myself- They were professed atheists, and gloried in the commission of crimes, that would make any man, who had the least idea of a future state, start back with honor» I was happy to be the associate of men, w hose way of thinking coincided with my own, and which served to lull alarming con¬ science tö rest ; for, if there was no hereafter, what hael I to fear ? Full of this persuasion, I hurried precipitately from one enormity to another, conti¬ nually drowning thought in riot. " My income ivas much too small for my expences, and I was one day meditating, in what manner I should procure a temporary supply, when my servant entered, ajad saídj two gentle¬ men
«JU ρ^ Ώ ^nmted to speak with me. It was w * cc md Guivera*, whose flnances •j>^ re in the same state as my own. З е У <tøme to tell me, they bad disco* ¿ Я -ed t:hat the king's secretary and two /^hes, slightly attended, would return ^ ^ a Bles that night, and have with them ^ ton %lerable sum of money, and ifl T M Guiverat would riele up to the car- j>^ e » Price and four others would ma- : % e ^he servants. I instantly entered ^ to ^he scheme, and we set off to ^t it into execution. It was agreed, , ^fj if any resistance was made, im- *ее1ц£ С 1у to dispatch those within, hile pii L . e and his companions were ^ do the same by the servants« We y bt proper disguises, and set out for * e uWined spot v % " It was half an hour before the ear- tye came up—We stopped ît. The la** ies > for there werethree-, shrieked, the' Vo *, IL L seere.
secretary called aloud to his servants, they approached, and Price shot the foremost of them, then called out to me to dispatch. I bid Guiverat fire, while I held røy pistol to the breast of one of the ladies. His ball entered the gentlemans side, and he fell back a- gaínst the pistol in rny hand; it went ofi¡ and shot the lady dead. We then instantly set about stripping the com¬ pany of what they had about them ; the sum was not exaggerated. As soon as we had obtained the bootv, we has- tened from the spot, returned to Naples, and shared it, "The next day, the officers of jus¬ tice were dispersed in all directions to apprehend us, with a full description of our persons, (as they then appeared.) The gentleman was uot dead, but the lady was, and two of the servants. Se¬ cure from detection, we mixed in the very
very companies that lamented them, and made an additional number to those that commiserated their fate. Every person was lost in astoiiishnient, that the perpetrators ©f such a deed should remain undiscovered, notwithstaneling the diligent search that was made af¬ ter them. "As long as the money lastet!, we were happy; but that being soon dis¬ sipated, we ventured again. But in this we were defeated, a party of horse¬ men coming up at the moment, when we had stopped two carriages. Four of our party were taken ; but Price, G uh erat aud myself escaped, aud iu this -society took shelter. What enor¬ mities wc have been guilty of since, I shall not îepeat, as they are well known to the community. The oath that, bound me to a strict observance of its 'Uwa İs what I have not, or ever meant L S to
to violate, and that which binds us to give a true account of our trans¬ actions, when absent from the palace, has been uniformly observed by me. And now, father, you have heard my confession, do you think it possible that a wretch like me can ever hope for mercy, since the crimes I was guil¬ ty of, before I came here, were more than sufficient to consign me to eter¬ nal torments ; for, now I am convin¬ ced there are such : among the fiends that I saw just now, I plainly discover¬ ed two of my former companions, and the intimate friends of Owen; they held the whips and lashed him and $t. Prie round the room/' Here the tears streamed again down his face» which affected all, but Price ; he was too much hardened in wicked* ness to feel " These tears/* said fa¬ ther Gregory, " augur a heart sensible of
of its crimes, and a desire to become a true penitent. If so } there is yet mercy in Heaven for you ; but, without in¬ cessant prayer, fasting and humiliation, I will not venture to say that the just God, who abhors all crimes, and detests all sinners, will grant you pardon. Let, as I have told you already, your penitence be sincere, and you need not doubt the bounty of the Most High, who is ever more ready to give than to receive. Be convinced of this great truth, That there is a God, who, at the lust day, will pass a just and righteous judgment upon all the most trifling of his creatures, There is not a single action of ours, whether good or bad, but what is noted by him. Millions have lived in error like yourself, but I trust and hope few, very few, have died in it. For, we shall most assuredly find iu a future state a place of rewards and punishments, and the scene which L 3 we
we have witnessed to day is, I think, a sufficient proof of it. Those that have lived amidst the commission of the greatest crimes, and those who, in spite of the alarms of conscience, have dared to die without repentance, or owning the power of God, a power wiiich even pagans, in all ages and in all climes, have admitted, will share the same fate. And that he, at times, deputes his angels to warn mankind of their danger, and to rouse them to a sense of their guilt, by permitting dis¬ embodied spirits to take upon them the form of corporeal substances, I am firmly persuaded. I am likewise cer¬ tain, that supernatural appearances are allowed by the Almighty ; and, as a proof oť my assertion, that I am not the only one that believes in such things, I shall just mention some lines of the great English poet, ľ liiton, when treating on such a subject ; v Million*
* Millions of spirits walk the world unseen ; Roth when we wake end when we sleep. 'J'hese execute their airy purposes And works of love or eumtty fulfil.' * There are angels/says another author of the same nation, ' who are minister¬ ing spirits, sent forth to those to whe n the Almighty is pleased to communicate his will, in the special affairs of this world. Instances of this nature are innumerable in the sacreel volume. These angels ass me bodies, in the like¬ ness of human nature, and are capaci¬ tated to speak in the language of men. A verv awful messenger of this kinel we have represented in the book of Job, which is no inconsiderable proof of the real existence of apparitions. The ob¬ scurity of this image conspires to reu¬ eler the description truly tremendous» " In thoughts from the visions of the u night, when deep sleep falleth upon L 4 lť ;;en,
" men, fear came upon me and trem- ťí bling, which made all my bones to 4 i shake. Then a spirit passed before my 4i face. The hair of my head stood up. " It stood still ; but I could not dis- * ť cem the form thereof. An image was tl before mine eyes ; there was silence, ťí antl I heard a voice. ShJl mortal man " be just before God?" God himself is a spirit, a being immaterial and immoital. Angels and the souls of men are immaterial, and made immortal by the great Supreme Being, We are taught that many of those angels fell from their first state of innocence, and were removed, from the realms of happiness, to the man¬ sions of misery. These evil spirits are ( er meditating the ruin of mankind, and employ all their power to seduce human souls from the paths of duty, How far they have p'-wed successful ΙίΐΆ-
history affords a melancholy repre¬ sentation. ' ' Satan is saitl, in the second book of Chronicles, to have tempted David to number his people, thereby trusting more to an arm of flesh, than in the living God. The dread consequence of that was the suelden elest r uction of a great n umber by pestilence. Something like this is represented by Homer, in his first Iliad, where Apollo, by a pes¬ tilential air, deals death to thousantb in tlie camp of Achilles. Virgil, like¬ wise, in his /Eneid, beautifully sup¬ ports my assertion, where be says : Ve subterranean gods, whose awful sway The gliding «Jaobts arid silent shades obey ; О Chaos! heai, and Thlegelhon profound, Whobe soltmn empire stretches wide around ; invc me, ye great tremendous powers, to tell Of scene- and «л шик' ss ia the depths of heil. Cn ,·<■** L5
Give me your mighty secrets to display, Fann those dark realms of darkness to the day— Objeme they went throughdreary shades, that led Along the waste dominions of the dead ; As wandering travellers in woods by night, By the moon's doubtful ar.d malignimi hght. Dry den*. "I could produce many other in¬ stances of revelation by spirits. Ano¬ ther English writer, in a much ad¬ mired work, called the Spectator, says : * They are more excusable, who believe in apparitions, than those who reject all extraordinary revelations of this kind, and, contrary to the reports of all his¬ torians, sacred anel profane, ancient and modern, and to the traditions of all nations, think the appearance of spirits fabulous and groundless. Could we not give ourselves up to the gene¬ ral testimony of mankind, we shoukl to the revelation of particular persons, who are living, and whom we know and cannot distrust in othei" matters of fact' 'Lucre-
'Lucretius himself (though, by the course of his philosophy,' says thesame author, ť was obliged to maintain that rhe soul did not exist separate from the body) makes no doubt of the reality of apparitions, anel that men often ap¬ pealed after their death.' Thus you see there are so many testimonies to piove it, that I hope the period will arrive, m heu mankind in general will be peibUculed of the truth of these ob¬ servations, "This is not the first time I have taken opportunities to inculcate the same belief; but í have hitherto been laughed at : now I hope, since you have been convinced of its reality, that my opinions will have more weight. You must be persuaded I can have no interest in any thing I say, but what relates to your eternal good. To save a kindled soul from the jaws of helL, L G apt!
and to defeat the purposes of malig¬ nant spirits, I would undergo any fa¬ tigue, misery and distress, that my feeble frame could support, so I had the happiness of seemg him made sen¬ sible of his errors, anel ready to repose unlimited confidence in his God. If I coukl but draw one sinner from the paths of vice and foily, and get him to tread the road that leads to everlasting happiness, I should think I had not lived in vain ; and, when I reached the confines of eternity, and met his sou in bliss, I should forget the miseries and insults I had met with in this worid, and look up with fervent grati¬ tude to the Supreme Being, who hael thought proper, by calling me into exist¬ ence, to make me an humble instru¬ ment of his glory. Let what I have said to you sink deep into your heart, and not only into yours, but also into the hearts ofall here present, that the glorv
glory of God may be manifest, and that my soul may rejoice in your sal¬ vation, which God of his infinite mer¬ cy grant." The whole company joined in a fer¬ vent Amen ; even the hardened heart of Price was affected. Parlati was overcome by the violence of his feeiings, and appeared so very much agitated, that tbe rather advised him to try to get some repose, and, when he was a little composed, to pour out his soul in prayer to God. The wretched man as¬ sented, and he was helped by his com¬ panions to his room. He laid himself down upon his bed, and some of the community continued with him. For many hours, he was in agonies of body and mind. They gave him an opiate ; but it had no effect. Father Gregory was fetched ; he prayed by him, in the most fervent manner ; but it was some hours
hours before he was calm enough to mind what was said to him. At last, he listened attentively, and, when the father a&kcel him to join in the Lords prayer, he did with great earnestness. This gave the father much pleasure, anel he retired to rest, with a brighi: hope that his penitence u as sincere, It was late the next day, before they were assembled, the greater pai t of them being so much affected with what had happened. The fatlier fou nel his patient belter than he could expect, but Guiverat's appearance bespoke au internal conflict, little inferior to that of Parlati. He spoke but little, was perfectly indifferent about every thing respecting their journey ; but said he was certain he should be well enough to go, though·his countenance plainly indicated the contrary. Price was not iu tlie least affected with any thing, unless
unless when they were all together. One of the company asked the father, Whe¬ ther he thought they should again he visited before they left the palace. He answered, It was impossible to say ; but he bhould hope not. " And so do I," said Price, and he cast an inquiry eye around the room, whilst his whole frame was agitated with fear. Fitzallan watch- ed narrowly the movements of Guive¬ rat, and was certain, from observation, that his fears would get the better of bis reason, and lie would be guilty of some rash act upon himself. The fa¬ ther desired the strictest attention might be paid to him, and not to permit him out of their sight for a moment. They were now all bustle and hurry, to get ready for their departure. The different articles were ail packed with the greatest expedition, as not one of them but what were eager to leave a place
place subject to so much alarm. They found, upon examining their accounts, that the general stock in money and valuables amounted to full eighty thou¬ sand pounds. This was agreed to be parted equally amongst the whole com¬ munity, as they thought they should not like to return there again. The presents for the church, and the lots belonging to St. Prie and Owen, were sent off for Naples immediately, anil it was agreed that, as soon as those members returned, they were all to set off for Florence, as there wanted but a week of the time of being there. They returned the next day, and the whole tompany set out three hours after. The final division of the property was. to be settled by the grand priest at Bononi. At Naples, the carriages were wait¬ ing to take them, as every thing had been
been ordered the day before. The whole cavalcade proceeeled onward, in three divisions ; but they were all to meet at a certa i n ho use, at night, where beds hatl been ordered. The father took charge orone party, the captain of ano¬ ther, and Fitzallan and Joseph the third. In the first, were Parlati and Guiverat, and, immediately under the captain, was placed Price, who, as soon as he was got out of hell, as he called it, began to be as riotous and blasphe¬ mous as ever. It was near evening when they came to a small village, a short distance from where they meant to remain the night, when Price stopped the driver, anel swore he would not go any farther without a flask of wine. The e;aptain endeavoured to dissuade him from it, as it would detain them behind the rest of the company, but he did not mind that»*
that, he said ; the wine he would have, and quitted the cabriolet for the pur¬ pose of getting some; none went in it but the captain and himself. When he had drank his wine, and returned to the carriage, he started back. "What is the matter now ŕ" said the captain, who was sitting in it, "Why don't you take your seat ?" "How can I?" said Price; "Don't you sec some person has got it?" "Xot at all," said the captain, and he looked on the seat. "The wine has got up in your head ; come in, ami Jet us go on." lie looked again and agiin into the carriage. "Ifl must come in/' said he, "pray, take that seat I sat in, and let me have yours, as that is the only way to convince me there is no one there, though 111 be sworn I saw some¬ body just now." The captain thinking kirn disordered by driuking the wine fast^.
fast, complied with his whim and chang¬ ed his position. Price then entered, and they drove on ; but they had not proceeded above half a league, when Price suddenly exclaimed: "Let me out, let me out/' and made an effort to leave the carriage ; but, seemed by his gestures to be prevented from doing it. The captain was all amazement, and thought he hatl certainly drank more wine, than he could reasonably suppose any man could have elone in so short a space of time. He therefore elesi reel him to sit still, anei try whether he could not go to sleep ; but, turning, as he spoke, he saw the same two hands which had held the goblet, pressing tight the shoulders of Price, aud, in a num ner, pinioning him to the seat The blood forsook his face, as he viewed him. "Father of mercies !" he exclaim¬ ed
ed, "what is all this?" He attempted to call out to the postilion to stop; but, as he opened his lips to speak, the horses took fright, anel set off with such rapidity, as to bafile the strength of the driver. They soon came up with the company and passed it with the velocity of an arrow. They continued their rs^id course, till, coming to a sharp ar- f a wall, at the entrance of the tow u diey were to stop at, the carriage was overturned, and shivered in a thousand pieces ; the horses, freed from alt restraint, ran like lightning forward, surmounting every obstacle. The noise they made, with the remnants of the harness which hung about them* drew numbers of the in¬ habitants to their doors. They were stopped, at length, by a vine-dresser returning from work. From their ap- pearance* every one judged what had happen-
happened, and a great number set out towards the gate they had entered at, where they found, at no great distance, the captain, Price and the postilion, all apparently eleael, surro uneled by the fragments of the cabriolet. They rais¬ ed them up, and were preparing to car- ту them to the inn, when the remain* der of the company came up. They hael pushed on with all the speed they could make, being lost in conjecturing what could occasion the horses to go on with such amazing rapidity. They feared some accident, and tried by every means possible to come up with them j but in vain. They were all three conveyed to the inn, and surgeons sent for ; but, upon examination, no limbs were broke— they were only stunned by the fall»' They were each blooded and put to bed. In a short time, the captain became sensi·*
sensible, and asked Where he was, as well as Price. They informed him, and he said He did not find himself in tbe least hurt Soon after, Price was heard raving like one mad, that They would take him away, and let him get out of the carriage, and a great deal more to the same purport, all of which was unintelligible to every one but the captain. The postilion was the most reasonable, and from him they learned in what manner the horses had taken fright. He said that something fleeted before them, like a sheet of fire, which he took to be lightning. When tiie gentleman cried c Let me out, Let me out/ he thought, in all probability, he apprehended a storm of thunder, and did not like to go on ; but, not seeing any thing again, he was about to ask Whether he must or must not stop, when he saw another flame, and some¬ thing like the >shaj>e of a .man in it. At
At that, the horses took fright, and, though he strove with all his strength to rein them in, he found it impe>ssible, and he was necessitated to let them have thcir way; and, when they reacheel the angle, lie was unable to guide them round it ; the consequence was, the carriage was overturned. The whole company were rather sur¬ prised at the relation, and knew not uhat to make of the occurrence. The captain did not choose to give his thoughts upon the matter, lest the pos¬ tilion shoukl refuse to go on with them, and they had engaged him to the end of the second day's journey. He thought it best to attribute the ravings of Price to a disordered brain, arLing* from the too large quantity of wine he bad drank ; but he was eletermined to make the father acquainted with wliat he had seen, As soon, therefore, as they
they were all arrived, he sent for him, and informed him of it, adding that the bands continued to hold Price, till they were overturned, and that lie thought he saw St. Prie pass twice be¬ fore the horses ; but of this he was not certain. The father was much hurt at the account, fearing they should be obliged to leave Price at the hotel, or have him conveyed onwards with a guard. Either way would be very disagreeable ţ but he thought it best to.consult the members. Parlati and Guiverat were just as they were when they set out. The captain advised him not to men¬ tion what he had said till the next day ; to this the father agreed ; but, 'm the morningj they were surprised, at going into Price 1 » room, to find all his fear vanished, and he swearing and laughing at all that had happened. They
They then proposed setting off imme¬ diately. The captain would gladly have exchanged his companion for some other, but was unwilling to pro¬ pose it, and, therefore, went on as before. As they proceeded, Price saug, swore, laughed, and cried, by turns, alter¬ nately abusing the captain, calling him a coward, and, the next minute, prais¬ ing his bravery, and saying what a good man he was, anel how he would icport him as such, when he came to Bononi. Then «again he would say What a poltroon he was, not to strike oil' the hands that held him so dañinee! close, but desired he would shew more courage when it came again, anel assist h i in to send the devil away, for such he was sure it was, in the form of Owen. The captain begau to think his brain was in reality disordered ; Vol. IL M there-
therefore, thought it most prudent to say as he saidj and in this maimer they continued during the journey. Nothing more was seen, till the evening of thcir arrival at Florence ; when they were altogether preparing for their attendance at Bononi. The presents destined for the priests had been sent two hours before, and they waited the return of the messenger, to go thither likewise, as the next day was that appointed for the inauguration. They were sitting at table; the father was in earnest conversation with Par¬ iaţi, and Guiverat was attentively list¬ ening to the discourse, when Price sud¬ denly jumped up from the table, and exclaimed: " Now, the devil take me, if those damned hellish looking scoun¬ drels are not come here again ! I tell you once for all, go to Parlati."
The
The whole company turned their eyes to wat ds that part of the room to whieh he looked, and saw Owen, St. Prie, and three othei s standing in a line oppo¬ site to the chair of Price. They con¬ tinued for some minutes iu the same position ; then moved towards the ta¬ ble, and encircled Price, over whom they scatta eel some light powder. The messenger enteied at that moment, w itli onki *> to be at Bononi on the East (which was the name of the mansion to which the eaptain had been taken bv the prime) in four hours from that h u.c. Euh t h 'ша; was read v, anel tii* \ betont, in a granel cavalcade of hor ч meu. They thought, as they hfl the loom, that their distressing vi- ".itob would nimin behind; but in tliib the} weie mistaken ; for, the com¬ pany m eie no sooner on horseback, than the same honid forms were mount¬ ed also, dud kept in a line with them. M <2 Price,
Pi ice, who had set out in a state of desperation, now tried to make his horse go on faster, in hopes of leaving ihem behind ; but, in spite of every effort, the beast would not stir one step quick¬ er than the horse which was beside him, on which sat Owen. To describe the terrors of this unhappy man would be impossible. When he found that al! his endeavours to escape were fn.it le %s he would look at tiie captain, in a most supplicating manner, and e\ ince by his gestures what horrors he \uh undei ; but fear, or something ebe, kept him silent, and the whole company were so likewise ; a general panic pet vaded all. The four other disembodied beings were at the head of the troop, and, a*· they advanced, flashes of fire darted round them, while one of them elireeted the rest; and, as if impelled by some un¬ known power, they implicitly folioweel the footsteps of the horse he rode. The slow
slow and solemn manner in which they ascended the hill that led to the man¬ sion, and the dead silence observed by every one, struck tenor into the beans of all ; but not one of them had pow¬ er to leave the rank he was in, or turn either to the right or to the left. In this silent order, they reached the destined place; all of them alighted, and entered the great room allotted for them, without uttering a word. Price's face spoke a language that plainly said : 4 If I could get from this damned com¬ pany, the devil take mc, if I would come here again, in spite of all the oaths that bound mc to return/ They were detained in this room near an hour, the spectres still with them, when some music soundeel at a distance. The iouel and solemn tones arrested their attention. Again all was silent. The whole company seemed bounel by Мз a
a speli; all eyes were turned on their awful companions, but nnnecouki make the least observation, At length, the mtbic sounded again, but much nearer. Large folding doors, at the upper end of the room, were thrown open, and discovered an apartment similar to that the captain was in, when he took the oath, but much larger and illuminated in a style of beauty, that far surpassed every thing he had seen, or could con¬ ceive to be formed by the hand of man. Himself and the rest of the company were lost in wonder. When the sounds struck full upon tlieir ears, a smell of burning perfume** floated in the air ; a grand chorus of heavenly voices chaunted, and, in a few minutes, two priests entered, fol¬ lowed by along train of choristers dress¬ ed in white/ Then followed three moie priests, carrying palm branches. Then саше
came four young men, as they thought, dressed In a singular kind of loose robe, made in the Grecian »tyle ; a ray of glory seemed playing round their head**, and their whole appearance indicated something more than mortal. Then followed a long train of aged men, ha¬ bited like the choristers, with counte¬ nances that bespoke at once the resi¬ dence of every virtue. The train closed with ten men, bearing the offerings made to the priests ; amongst them was what had been sent by the captain'« company. The whole procession pass¬ ed slowly round the room, whilst the moat heavenly music sounded. They then arranged themselves on seats, facing the altar, on which the offerings were laid. This done, the captain's company were ordered to attend t he minor priest. They were conducted to hi* apartment, M 4 when
when eaeh gave in a scaled packet, anel one for Fitzallan was delivered in by the captain. They seemed still to be deprived of the use of speech. The five immaterial beings that were with them were regarded by the priest with horror, mixed with pity. He advan¬ ced to wai ds them, and waved a small ivorv crucifix over their heads. He spoke a few words ; they attended to him, and each held out his right hand, on which he looked with earnestness, then again waved the cross and drew back. Tliey were separated from the rest of the company, who had long white robes, that entirely covered them, put on them by two attendants. This done, the priest advanced, and put into each one's hand a small piece of ivory, oí' the size of a ducat, гхюк a palm branch. elippeel it in some water, and .sprinkled each of them with it, then said :
"May
" May he, who died upon the cross for ihe sins ofall mankind, cleanse you from your sins, and teach you in what manner you can obtain eternal redemption, and enjoy, after this pain¬ ful life is ended, everlasting happiness 'm the realms of bliss und immortality 1" A choir of heavenly voices chauut¬ ed the response Атсп у in which the ν hole company joined. The organ m full tone began to play ; he waved the cross over their head* three times, then advanced to the door, and, with the cross, beckoned the company to follow. They did, and entered the grand room, whilst a divine hymn was chauiitej by the choir. They took thcir seats on the right ofthose wl. о sat facing the altar. They ventured to cast their eyes round, in search of Owen and his companions ; they were not to be seen, but the captain disco¬ li 5 vered,
vered, amongst the company that first entered, the prince and two others, whom he remembered to have seen take the oaths at the same time he diel. The hymn finished ; the engan ceased ; a darkness seemed to approach. Loud thunder rolled at a distance ; lightnings flashed, and the lights, that before burnt so clear and so bright, were now dimmed, and gave only a very faint glimmer. At times, they were wholly obscured, and the compa¬ ny in total darkness. The mansion shook with the wikl uproar of contend¬ ing elements ; sheets of liemid tire blazed round the room ; sulphureous smoke enveloped the whole, and augur¬ ed instant suffocation. The groan* of wretches expiring iu torments met their ears ; the yells came nearer ; they heard the lashes of whips, and, in a moment, all hell appeared as open ta their
their view. Numberless fiends were seen driving, with unrelenting fmy } the miserable victims, from one end of tiie horrid gulph to the other. The groans redoubled, and, in a few mi¬ nutes, entered, writhing uneler the lash of their diahv?!ieal tormentors, the five which had accompanied them to the mansion. Fitzallan, as soon as he heluld C ven, wasovercemie by the sight, aiu; f.dl at the feet of father Cm gory. He raised anel .supported him, assisted by the captain, who moved to his relief. In the mean time, the five were driven to the foot of the altar, round which thev ranged th emselves. Human nature ¿hrunk back, appalled at the dreadful sight, and, though they abhorred their vices, yet felt pity and compassion for them. Not so their merciless tormentors ; they were impatient again to renew Μ в the
the punishment. As soon as they were on each side the altar, three priests dressed in black, drew near ; they took from the altar five slips of paper ; they broke the seals, and read aloud That he whose name was affixed haei obeyed the summons he had reetiveel, and was then waiting the last ceunmanels of the community. The whole company arose, except those tliat supported Fit/allan. Ihe priest turneel himself round ; then, ad¬ dressing the five tliat stood liefere him, saitl—·" The crimes you stood accused of have occasioneel vour names to be craseel from the list of this society ; you are doomed, by the decrees of tlie most high God, to wander far from the seats of bliss ; you are excluded this society, and he, whose judgment none can call in question, excludes you from Heaven. You have been summoned here
here by those who glory in obeying the u ill of Omnipotence, to shew a striking contrast, between the fate of those in the region of spirits, who have lived a life of. virtue, and those who have lived a life of vice. You had all the same scene presented to your view, when you first became members a- mongst us. Blame not the decrees of Heaven ; your crime's seal your doom ; and may those who have been your as- .soc uites in vice, who have not as yet paid the great elebt of nature, but arc here present, may they take warning by those sufferings they behold inflict¬ ed on you, to avoiet the temptation that first ensnared you, but which you might have withstood, had you not suffered ungovernable passions to gain the dominion over you. You see your names erased from this book of frail mortality, anel they have long since been erased in htav* The
The priest then took a large black book, which lay upon tiie altar, ami dvvw a pen through the five names. He closed the book ; the groans of t he damned were heard again ; the thunder rolled in wild, tremendous uproar; the lightning blazed with tenfold horror; the victims were driven from the altar; the mouth of heli was open to receive them, the\ were plunged headlong in, and, amidst a loud hurst of thunder, the scene in a moment closed. The bright beams of iiirht a^ain irradiated the room ; the soft voice of the minstrels sounded ; the organs melodious tones again vibiatcd on the ear; again all was peace, harmony, and love. Fitzallan had not recovered, though every assistance had been given, aud the choristers were moving to the altar, before
before he shewed any signs of return¬ ing life. Their souls seemed to ascend in pious rapture to the throne of hea¬ ven. The whole assembly joined the extatic harmony, and, as the grand chorus sounded among the arches of the vaulted roof, Fitzallan recovered his senses. The sudden transition, from what he thought heil, to heaven, had nearly proved fatal for him a second time. He looked round in wild amaze¬ ment , he was almost afraid to breathe, iest he should disturb the realms of happiness, to which he thought himself translated. Father Gregory, who stood near him, did notattemp' to undeceive him ; he thought it best to indulge his reverie. Ihe captain sought to read the countenance of Price, but was surprised not to sec him among the company. Parlati and Guivcrat were near the fa¬ ther ,
ther ; their countenances bespoke the sincerest penitence. The captain was distressed, and mentioned to him that he saw not Price. ib lie has been overcome by his fears," said he ; tť if you look again, you will se j e the mem¬ bers busied in recalling him to life. I hope this sight will awaken in him a sense of his sins, though I much fear, notwithstanding the manner in which he is at present affected, there is but httle hopes of seeing him a sincere pe¬ nitent : he is, í fear, too deeply root t d in vice 1 /' They were roused to atten tiem by a new strain of music, much too seraphic to be mortal. Amazement sat on the face of every one. A dead silence en¬ sued, as if afraid to disturb the angelic harmony. The room breathed ten thousand blooming odours,
The
The organ had ceased ; the breath of angels was upon them ; the priests, dressed In white, advanccel towards tbe altar. The four heavenly forms they lud noticed, when the choristers first entered, now approached, anel placed themselves on each side of it. The choristers followed, and formed a line that extended from the altar to the door. Myriads of glories beamed around the four heavenly strangers, and the whole room was filled with celestial light, whilst, at a distance, the great concave of heaven opened, and hca\enly spirits appeared ascend¬ ing and descending along the vast ex- ρ, -usr. Music, attended with the voices »4* thousands of immoital spirits, •innn d d aud wrapt the soul in sweet L ] ; >Ш!11. Price was recovered at the momeut u hen this grand choir perfoi med the hymn
hymn of gratitude to heaven. This scene afiected him, ami, in an agony of remorse, he exclaimed : " And must I, miserable sinner! be denied to enter that heavenly place î Oh ! no, no ; teach me, oh ! teach me how to deserve it/' He wrung his hands in anguish, and strove to ejaculate a short prayer. The priest had taken the four elíps of paper as before ; he broke the seals, and read : " The complying with their engagement/' The priest with rever¬ ence knelt before them, and offered up a fervent prayer of thanks to Heaven, for thus permitting mortals to view the transcendant brightness then before them, and to behold amongst them those who had once been their fellow sufferers, in the great woik in which they were engaged, to Ining back en¬ ing mortals to the paths of virtue, and, by contrasting the different states of virtue
ч it tue and vice, after this painful life is ended, to alarm the sinner, to com¬ fort the repenting proselyte, and en- courage inm to persevere in the pursuit of' righteoueneee. " To you/' said he, " heavenly ministers of eternal goodness I we offer up our prayers and thanks, for all the services ye have rendered the members of this society. Your names, as regis¬ tered in our earthlv book, will ever be looked upon by us with awe and rever¬ ence. Though you are taken from all visible intercourse with us mortals, yet deign, with your celestial aid, to protect those who shall this night become members of our societv. Strengthen them in all dangers, sup¬ port them in all difficulties they may have to encounter, support the droop¬ ing spirits of the tmly penitent, and leach them to repeise with conhdence ou
on the merries of their f í od. You aie now beco nie ministering angels before tbc throne of grace, Ah î teach each mortal whom it may be your destiny to warn from the evil of his ways, that the paths of pleasure lead but to the grave, and that a death-bed repentance is not to be relied on. Many will be the trials of the group now present ; hut the Lord of life will, I trust in you, comfort and support them." The priests ceased, and bowed rever¬ ently before the four ; the music, which had been silent during the invocation, now again burst forth with redoubled harmony ; the bright visions were now encircled in a heavenly cloud ; the srlorv that beamed around them became more and more resplendent, until it increased too much for mortal sight to bear ; the company bent their heads in adoration. The cloud expanded, and fc
and, amidst a burst of heavenly har¬ mony, they vanished from their sight. The scene gradually closed, whilst the music died imperceptibly awny, and left the wondering admirers lost İn joy and rapture, eaeh one rejoicing in the hope that they should one day be happy inhabitants of the blessed abodes they had beheld. Eacli one was determined to become a worthy member, and blessed the moment that first brought them to that seat of peace. For some moments all was silent The priests arose ; their countenances were overspread with rays of the divi¬ nity, and they >ecmed to have imbibed immortal fervor. The eldest addressed them all in a speech of some length, pointing out to them the happy con¬ sequences of a life well spent. He dicw a parallel between what they had seen and heard that night, and earnestly exhort-
exhorted them to let it sink deep into tlicir hearts. i( You are now/" said he, "called together, to give in your ac¬ count, in what manner the last year has been spent. This account, though strict, is not so exact as the one you must render up at the last day, where the secret actions ofall will be known, and that which has been executed in darkness will be brought to light. I, therefore, charge you, in the name of the most high God, not to venture on your inauguration, unless you are fully eletermined to become sincere and ar¬ dent brothers. There is not one among us exempt from sin ; but he that re¬ pents, and falls into the same crimes asai n, is tenfold worse than he that never repented at all, and is, in every respect, like a bea*t returning to wallow in the mire. Sorry I am indeed to find, that the number of the unhappy this year, exceeds those of the happy ; but I
I am led to hope, from the awful warn¬ ing you have had, that this will be the last time lever shall experience the piercing gi iefof knowing a fellow erea¬ tuie doomed to endless torments. I have one sincere aml hea tfelt pleasure to impart to you, that I do not find one member who has notified his wish to become inaugurated on the black Ibt, There are some among you, whom I tiembled to hear, three months ago, were ready for that awful сектпопу ; butthe hand of Heaven has prevailed over the snares of hell ; they are now, I titter, aud hope, sincere penitents; as such, I shall be happy to receive tliem inti) the number of those, who live a blessing to themselves and to all around them. It gives inexpressible transport to my aged heart, to find this night will pass without a sacrifice, except wiiat will be ofiered up by every grateful
grateful heart to the Supreme Being of Heaven and earth. "The iiisructious you have all re¬ ceived, on your first entering this com¬ munity, will, I hope, nowbereligiou.·»- I) observed But to a select number ib destined the completion of a woi k, in the execution of which you must encounter some disagreeable rebuffs, from the ministers of darkness, by w hom you will be opposed ; but, whilst you place a firm confidence in the pro¬ tection of (iod, you need not í ear what mortal or immortal may iment to di>- tress you. Follow implicitly the direc¬ tions ofthat good pasten' you have hi¬ therto had among you, and all will be well Those that now sufier alîlic- tion shall sufier it no more, and those that are parted from their earthly frienels shall again be united to them, and they will enjoy a foretaste ofthat happiness, vhich
triiich is in store for those that do by every one m they would be done by. " It will be required of those I have hinted at that they return to Vento- lien e. There are some services for them to perform to the memory of the dead. Our fellow labourer in God, father Gregory, will receive instructions of what must be done, and it will be his duty to see it performed ; that finished, you will, in the pleasure ever arising from the knowledge of doing good, derive that peace which is ever the com¬ panion of the righteous. The oaths you have alyeady taken must be renew¬ ed, and this is termed inauguration. You must now draw near and receive the sacrament." This said, the whole company drew up, and formed a circle round the altar. The divine institution of our blessed Vot. IL N Saviour
Saviour commenced ; the bread and wine was hallowed by the good priests ; that done, the oath was taken, and each confirmed it by the holy sacra¬ ment, and, in a manner similar to that observed by lhe protectants, it was ad¬ ministered to each individual. This pious ceremony over, the priest gave them his heavenly benediction ; the organ sounded ín lofty strains, whilst choristers sung : ** Glory to God on high, on earth peace, and good will towards men. '' Parlati, Price, and Gui verat, were presented severally, as men determined to become sincere penitents. They were received as welcome candidates for the crown of glory that fudeth not away. A general benediction was then bestowed on all, and the priests depart¬ ed, attended by the choristers singing a vrand chorus, in the same manner as they
they had entered ; noue departed but them ; the rest, who were ehest in the white robes, now came forward to those who hael come from Ventoliene. The principal of them advanced. " You now,"said he, "arcentered on the list of those whose duty it will be, not only to be good themselves, buttoendeavour to make others so, as far as in their pow¬ er lies, anel to be in every sense of the word worshippers of the eternal God. You must return to Ventoliene ; the bones of the innocent must be collect- eel, and to seven select it will belong to set the tioubled spirits there at rest; after which, all must return bee, when a final eli vision will be made of the pro¬ perty belonging to the members ; each individual, I trust, will then be permar n ently happy. When the ashes of the dead are placed in sacı ed ground, no¬ thing further will be required of you ; but your return to the palace must be made
«iade directly, to see the last sacred ceremony performed over the remains ofthose long since numbered with the dead. " They all expressed thcir readiness to go, arid the necessary instructions were given to father Gregory. The prince Bononi stepped forward, embraced the captain, and testified his pleasure at again seeing him. Father Theodore likewise advanced, a mutual pleasure glowed in their countenances at again meeting. He returned their embrace, and said he hoped to be blest with their society, at his return to Flo¬ rence, Mutual congratulations were m ven and received, and the whole as- semhly departed. END OF THE SECOND VOLUME*. C. Stowcr, Printer, > King Surer, Covent Garden, y
