Disclaimer: This file is generated from OCR (optical character recognition), which is a technology that converts images of text into text. While the technology is good at deciphering legible text, there are limitations and some text may not have been extracted correctly.
The romance of Smyrna: or, The prediction fulfilled!!
THE
ROMANCE OF SMYRNA; Se. Sc.
CHAP. I. Go on, pursue! assert the sacred canse : Stand forth, thou proxy of all-ruling Providence, Ana save the friendless infants from oppression. Saints shall assist thee with prevailing prayers, v And warring angels combat on thy iide. Rowe. İLT was at Alexandria I met with him. A Sheik of one of the Provinces near Grand Cairo requested me,, when I arrived at Alexandria, to find out the gentleman, and deliver to him a letter, which he liked not to in¬ trust to any other hand, and I promised to do it. The Sheik was a man I had a high veneration for; he bad served me Vo L# Η. В often,
Ô often, and, on my first visit to Grand Cairo, was the means of saving my life; I was, therefore, happy to render him every service in my power. ** I found the gentleman surrounded by Franks of different nations, as it was his usual custom to be every day for three hoars. I executed my commission; he received me with great politeness, and requested I would, as often as I could make it convenient, spend an hour with him. 1 accepted his offer with pleasure ; be appeared to me to be a man of insi¬ nuating address, and about forty years of age. He had three children; his wife was English likewise. She was not hand¬ some, nor were her manners more allur¬ ing. She was polite to all where she thought her interest was concerned; but, to those who were dependent on her, I observed she assumed the most haughty and imperious carriage, She affected tbe customs and manners of the Asiatics, without that delicacy and reserve which marks
τ marks the characters of ladres m that part ofthe world. ** She would frequently enfargefefn the beauty and accomplishments ofthe Eng* lish ladies, and say, It was next to im¬ possible for a gentleman to guard his heart against their numerous attractions. I would often, out of that politeness I thought due to her sex, listen to these en¬ comiums on her countrywomen, though I used to think she was but a bad speci¬ men of those boasted charms. However, I continued my visits, as 1 had occasion to correspond with some person in Europe, and by this merchant's means, I found I could receive my letters more readily than I was accustomed to do. This circumstance made his acquaintance the more desirable. 44 I was engaged there one evening, when they introduced to me a young English gentleman and his sister; the former about sixteen, and the latter four¬ teen years of age. They were both in В 2 their
tbeiri persosi ábvely, especkllly tne lady. I expressed my admiration, and said, That Mrs. Murray, (whieb was the mer- chanťs name) had indeed given me a very good specimen of the beauty of her countrywomen* She answered, She was happy to hear me acknowledge her opi¬ nion of, them was just. She said, The young lady was designed as a wife for her son¿ then at Rosetta, and the young gentleman was to be united to one of her df&ttghters, who had been sent to England for education, and was to re¬ turn in the next ship that was expected from thence. 44 I asked after the parents of this love¬ ly pair*: she said» They were orphans, and had been kft to her husband's care by their father*; and they were^by the will of their parent, who had been hen hus- band!s particular friend, ordered to be united in the planner she tokL me; and, înmiise th# children did not comply with those ííondfeions^ fhe whole of thek for¬ tune
fune devolved to herhusbsmd, whohadthè management of it, ever since the-death of their father, who dfed at Alexandria eight years before 5 bul the children had been left in England, at school, ever since, as their mother died in child-bed of the young lady. " I enquired Whether they had any relations living in England. She said, Yes, they had an uncle and'two aunt$; but they had nothing to do with them, as the will of their father had expressly said—They were to be solely under the care of her husband. Indeed, she did not think any person so proper as he was. Their fortunes were,, she said, very con¬ siderable. " I know not what was the reason, but I felt a kind of uneasiness at the idea of seeing those two lovely beings united to this family. I had never seen either of tMs woman's children ; but I now felf a great deáre¿ and, therefore, asked, When her son Was expected home ? В 3 She
10 She sàidi In tue course of a week or ten i&y$ť~*ŕ Have tbe young couple seen each other?' said L * No/ she replied. ~n* Thein, how dp you know they will apprqv& or % rnatcb?' * Oh, Lord iiess tmí* said she*; 'there is no occa¬ sion for that ; they know they must com- ply>%** jjyi tø ave y OU consulted your ovpi children upon! it?' 'No/ she ra- pjie^i ς thejf røust be foob, indeed, to re¬ fusato тдггу, when there is such good fortunes for them; and, if those young people ί don't like røy son and daughter, why, they must be cpntent to be beggars, that's alî.! ■г i > i4 « Дпа that's a great pity,' said I ; 4 for 'tis hard to force their inclinations/ * How can they be forced ?' said she. f Is iţ not the r w f ill of their father? and, sure· ly, he knew wha,t w,äs best for them/ * True, д тафт,' sajd I; 'but all pa¬ rents are npt fit judges of what is proper forthe^r children; however, fo this case, we wiü suppose he was/ v ' Yes, cetT tainly/
11 tainly/ said she, * and so you will say, when you come to see my son and * daughter/ I acquiesced in what she said, and we changed the conversation. 44 In about a fortnight after, she inform¬ ed me her son was returned, and would be happy to pay his respects to me. He entered the room, and accosted me with an air that displeased me. It was bold and assuming. He asked me, with very little ceremony, Whether I liked his in¬ tended wife? for, his mother had told him I had seen her· I answered him, coldly, That I thought the lady more fit to grace an European court, than to live at Alexandria. 4 I don't know much about courts/ said he; ( it will be time enough for me to think about that, when I have scraped together a few thousands more ; and then, perhaps, we may return to Eng¬ land, and go to court with the best of them/ 44 I was visibly hurt at the flippant and assured air of this coxcomb, for such he B i was.
12 wis. His person was the counterpart of his accomplished mother's. I felt sen¬ sibly the sacrifice the lovely girl was about to be made to tbis insignificant, I wished a thousand times to have an opportunity of .speaking to her alone, òr to her brother, whose fate I equally la* rrtenred, as I did not doubt but that the daughter was the prototype of the son. I revolved over in my mind a thousand different methods to serve thero, ifl found they were averse to the proposed union ; but how to accomplish it I knew not. The yourig gentleman, I found, had seen his intended wife in England, and from ihe melancholy air visible in both him tmd his sister, I was led to think neither approved of the choice made for them. te Chance, one day, luckily presented røe an opportunity of speaking with the youth. I found him in the garden, alone ; he was sitting in a pensive posture, read¬ ing a tetter, wbich he hastily put up, as he saw me approach. I affected not to notice
1$ notice it, but addressed him in the usual way. " After some tittle conversation! I Ven¬ tured to ask him, How he liked the cus¬ toms and manners of the country he wte come to reside in ? He fetched a deepslgb, and said : * Pardon me, Sir, if I act in¬ genuously, and say I do not like it at all I lament, and ever shall, the fate that compels me fo leave a country, in whfch myself and sister first drew breath/ * But, surely/ said I, * when you are going to be united to the lady of your choice, and she resides here, you cannot faii to be' happy/ * Ah, Sir/ said he, turning his eyes towards me, suffused with teats, *if you knew what struggles pass in mine and my sister's breasts, to comply, witli¬ out a murmur, with the will of my father, you would pity us. We v have not a friend in the world that can serve u&; and, if we do not fulfil implicitly hiá com¬ mands, we must be beggars^ I think, В 5 Sir,
14 Sir, you have heard Mrs. Murray say as Much.' '* * I have, my child/ said I, c and I cannot help thinking it a pity, that both of you should be 'tied down to marry ir> tè this family. Surely your father must have had a great opinion of your guardian, and his childien, or he never would have executed such a deed.* ( 'Tis that cir- ccwastance,' said the youth, * that dis¬ tresses me more than all the rest. Had my poor sister been left to make a free choice, I would not have repined at my own wretched lot; but, when I reflect on wbat she is doomed to suffer, with an ignorant, vulgar, base-born wretch, as thisrnan'-s son is, I am tempted to curse the=,hour I first had existence. Happy is it that my dear mother cannot be sen¬ sible of our misery ; but, had she lived, this would never have been/ t * c '-Js not your guardian born a gentle- manľ saídíí f I think you called his son base-born.' * I did, Sir,' said he, f and with
1δ wirh reason. My present guardian was nothing more than a domestic of my fa¬ ther's, and his wife the same. They went out with my parents to Bombay, he as my father's valet, and his wife as my mo¬ ther's waiting-maid. At the time of their quitting Europe, I was a year and a half old, and was left in England, under the care of one of my aunts. My mother did not stay long in India, for thé climate did not agree with her, and as soon as she found hersejf again pregnant, she returned to England, but survived the birth of my sister only three days. My aunt then took charge of us both, and discharged the duty of a parent by us for eight years. " * At the expiration of that time, she received letters from my father, stating his intention to return to his native coun¬ try, and that he meant to come over-land. This account gave the family great plea¬ sure, and, young as we were, we often dwelt on the delight we should experi- B б ence,
ш f псе, in seeing a parent we had heard so muGh of, and whom we longed to behold. We were anxious to improve our learning, that we might pleasingly surprise him with our infantine acquirements, and give bim the same satisfaction in meeting us, as we fondly hoped to derive from seeing him. We were, therefore, assiduously employed İn our various pursuits, and every day in full expectation of receiving a letter, to say he was arrived in Europe, when, one day, a large packet from» Ro¬ setta was delivered by two gentlemen*— It was from Murray, informing us of the death of my father, at that place, and in¬ closing a copy of his wiil, properly attest¬ ed. He stated in his letter, the great charge committed to his care ; in conse¬ quence of which, he desired my aunt to* place us at boarding-schools, in the vici¬ nity of London, and to order every thing proper for us ; for which purpose he re¬ mitted a draft for a thousand pounds, and another for five hundred, which my father had
17 had bequeathed my aunt, for the trouble she had taken with us; and desired her to¬ rnáké out her accounts, and send them to him, it not being his intentiorbto return to* England, as he had an opportunity of en¬ tering into a mercantile concern at Alex¬ andria. 44 * This distressing intelligence was nearly the death of my aunt. Her bro* ther did every thing he could to set the will aside, as he thought it an unjust one in regard to us ; but he failed in his at¬ tempt, and we have been obliged to sub¬ mit to its decrees. We were led to hope¿ at one time, that this man might come to 1 England to reside; but, about two years, ago, w r e were given to understand he would not, by the arrival of his daughter in London, for education; and from her we learnt that we were to be taken to this place, as it was her father's intention ne¬ ver to return ; but that his son probably would, after he was. the husband of ray sister. I was destined to stay with hini in
Ιβ in Asia, unless we chose to resign our fortunes. 44 4 My aunt shuddered at the idea ofmy being the ^husband of this girl, and, by the account she had heard of the son, she was led to form no better hopes for my sister. She consulted her brother again and again, on the propriety of our relin¬ quishing our claims, as she thought the small fortune she might be enabled to leave us at her death, might, if I entered into any sort of mercantile pursuit, be sufficient to enable us to live, if not in af¬ fluence, yet with decency. But my uncle could not be brought to consent to our making so great a sacrifice; and, when the lettera came from Murray, to inform my aunt that we should be removed, that we might be immediately under his care, she, with tlie most bitter reluctance, con¬ sented to our going. The girl destined for my wife was to stay in England some time longer, but for what reason we could
19 could nqţ teli; we.were only led to guess that it was her ovvn desire. „ " 4 l cannot attempt to describe the dis¬ tress of my poor aunt at parting from us, nor our affliction at quitting her, and she could not, at the moment we left her, help reflecting on my father, for the will he had made, especially as she saw I be¬ held my destined wife with a kind of hor¬ ror ; and, since my arrival here, the dread of seeing her has increased to that degree, that I am absolutely tempted to wish the vessel that is to bring her might be cast away. Then, again, I reflect on what use that would be -, it will not hinder my poor sister becoming a martyr; so that I know not what to do. I wish I had some friend to propose to Mr. Murray, if he would not insist on ray sister's marrying his son, to take half of her fortune, and permit me to give up half mine to him, the day I become his son-in-law/ 44 At this word, an ashy paleness over¬ spread his cheek. 44 4 Then,
2d * 'Then, you consent fo marry hiš daughter/ said Ï, * provided he will not insist upon your sister Being the wife of Mis son ?' 4 Yes, Sir/ said he, € I would consent to almost any thing, so I could But see her happy ; for, believe me, Sir, she is too good for him/ * Have you/ I asked, * seen the other daughtei ?' * No/ he replied, * I have not. She resides at Rosetta, in the house where my poor fa¬ ther died. She is not, I think, liked by her father and mother ; nor indeed by her brother. They all speak lightly of her, but for what reason I know not. ** * To that house, it seems, her father never goes,, as the slave who waits on my sister told her yesterday. He was fright* ened thence about six years ago, and has not been there since. None, but his el¬ dest daughter, will stay there, and three slaves, to whom she is very kind. It was something about this house that they have taken a dislike to their child, and not, it seems, from any ill-conduct of hers, as she
2i she is, by the report of every one ebe, a very good young lady/ " * Then/ said I, * my dear boy, can¬ not you make choice of this daughter? In ali probability, you will like her better than her sister/ * I do not know, Sir r said he, 4 but what I might ; but how shall I propose it to Mr. Murray? The lady in England is the favourite, and I hear nothing else from any one, when talking on the subject, but the praises of her, whom I shudder to think of/ " The youth paused. I reflected on what he said for 'some minutes; at length a thought struck me, that I would, inthe course of conversation, that evening, with Mrs. Murray, take an opportunity of mentioning her other daughter; and, ifl found her communicative, to express a wish to see her, which I was led to hope I might obtain, as, regarding me as a man of large fortune, and without any family, they might imagine I should be induced to fancy her ; and I was certain the mr> ther
22 ther would do any thing to aggrandise her child, especially as that child was not al¬ ready provided for. Full of this idea, I begged the youth to be more cheerful, and I would endeavour to see what I could do to serve him and his sister, whose fate I sincerely lamented. ** The tear of gratitude started to his eye ; he would have dropped upon his knees, but I prevented him. He took my hand, and kissed it with fervency. * Oh ! Sir,' said he, * save but my sister, and my whole life shall be devoted to your ser¬ vice.' I bade him rely with confidence upon me, as, from that moment, I would swear to serve him. He seemed perfectly satisfied with my assurance, and his face beamed with cheerfulness. ** We continued in the garden near ha\f an hour longer, when we were sum¬ moned to take coffee, during which I took the liberty to say, I meant to spend the day with them. M r $. Murray appeared pleased, and I promoted the conversar tion*
аз tion, which I was determined should be lively. " In the course of it, I caught a fa¬ vorable moment, when she was talking of the expected arrival of her accomplish¬ ed daughter, as she cailed her, to throw out a wish to see her other child ; intimat¬ ing, at the same time, that it was a pity she ahouîd remain single, when her bro¬ tlier and sister vvere so soon to be disposed of. The bait took, and the old lady pro¬ mised that I should see her, though she feared I should not find much to ap¬ prove of, as she had always been a per¬ verse girl, aad delighted in nothing but books. ** This account pleased me still more, as I really began to hope that some mean might be de\ ised, for the parents to be brought to consent to the young man's marrying this daughter, instead of the other. From the description the mother gave, and what the slaves had said, I supposed the lqdy to be thereyerse f of her family,
Í4 family, and that there might be some prospect of happiness for the youth with this girj, though none with the other, whom it was visible he had a rooted aver¬ sion to ; and, if he became her husband, it would be entirely with a view to serve his sister. My heart felt a strong interest in his favor, and I was determined to try, by every means in my power, to retard the matches, if I could not prevent them,- till I had made some enquiries respecting the father of these orphans, and what in¬ duced him to make so extraordinary a wiß. I had serme dealings with a Jew merchant, at Rosetta, who had resided there for many years, and knew the con¬ nexions of every one : from him I thought I mighťlearn some particulars I w r as igno* rant of, and I ŕésoľved to* go thefe the next day. 44 As soon as I had formed this plan in my mind* I told Mrs. Murray I should take a journey to Rosetta in á day or two, and, if it Wás agreeable, I would request the
2S
the company of her son, and the young Englishman, and would take that oppor¬ tunity of paying my respects, to her daugh¬ ter. She was highly pleased with this pro¬ posal, and said, Mr. Murray would be happy to be informed of my intention. " He was not present at our conversa¬ tion, and indeed seldom staid long with any of his guests. There was a pride about him to appear an Englishman of distinction, though, at the same time, he knew not how to accomplish it. His wife, I saw, governed him like another Xan¬ tippe ; for if, at any time, he ventured to give his opinion of any thing she did not immediately approve, he was sure to be reprehended by her, and, to avoid al¬ tercation, would abruptly leave the com¬ pany. I had, therefore, only to start a subject, that the husband and wife could not agree upon, and he was sure to be gone; though, when he was present, if the room was full of company, he would appear absent and thoughtful. When his
26 iñs wife observed this, she would tap him on the shoulder, and exclaim : * I wish, M& Murray, you would behave like ano¬ ther person» and not sit and think, think, think, when you should be doing some* thing else.' This speech never failed to rouse him, when he was sure to fly into the other extreme, and drink violently.— This inconsistency in his character I had remarked, from the first day of my acquaintance with him, and I always thought it arose from the effects of the climate acting upon a constitution habi¬ tually irritable. ■ ** I succeeded that day in sending Mr. Murray out of the room, and then I got the lady to arrange matters for our going to Rosetta the next day. This done, I soon after took my leave.
1 til - CHAP.
27
«»
CHAP. IL With the gentlest patience, Submissive, sad, and lowly was her look ; Upon her cheek a faintish flush was spread ; Feeble she seemed, and sorely smît with pain. Rows. " WHEN the morning came, I found every thing prepared for our jour¬ ney ; and, as I had no establishment at Alexandria, I was desired to accept of a horse provided by young Murray. We reached Rosetta early in the morning of the next day, but did not immediately go to Murray's house>as,to avoid any kind of suspicion, I told young Murray I must go to Nathan Israel's, on business of some moment, before I waited upon his sister. They went, in the mean time, to visit a friend, with whom young Murray was intimate, and at whose house he was, when I first saw his father. 44 I for-
28 4< I fortunately found my Jew friend at home. 1 lost no time in communicat¬ ing my business, but all the information I could obtain from hirîî wás, That Murray, and an English gentleman, ofthe name of Fonthill, arrived there overhand, from India, about eight years before—That Mr. Fonthill was Ul, at the time of his ar- rival, and his illness had increased so ra¬ pidly, as to prevent his Saving the city, as was his intention, in a fleet then ready for sea ; in consequence of which, he had taken an elegant house, and he un¬ derstood it had been the intention of Mr. Fonthill to continue there, till his health was so far re-established, as to enable him to leave it for Europe in safety; but he had not been in the house above six weeks, or two months, when he died, and my friend had been given to understand, likewise, that Mr. Murray had been left sole executor to his will. Mr. F. was reported to hâve died very rich, as he heard
29 heard from a gentieman tliat knew him well. " I asked him Whether this gentleman was still at Rosetta. He said Yes, he was, and would be with him the next morning on business ; and, if 1 chose it, I might speak with him. í should be very hap¬ py, I said, to have that opportunity ; and, if he would appoint the hour, 1 would come —He fixed ten. 44 I then left him, and went to the young men. They were waiting my re¬ turn, to take some refreshment, which. I did, and, soon after, we proceeded to Murray's house. It was a most charming place, situated near the lower beach, in¬ closed on all sides, but commanded a ñne view of the river and the adjacent coasts. The greater part of the house was shut up, and appeared much neglected ; but the wing that faced the sea was inhabit¬ ed by the lady. She received us with great politeness, and smiled through tears, if I might so express myself, as her face Vol. II. C bore
so Ъоге the marks of deep dejection, and her frame, though in the bloom of youth, appeared sinking under decay, visibly brought on by sorrow. She however en¬ deavoured to be cheerful; aud, when young Fonthill said, He wondered she could prefer a state of solitude and re¬ tirement to the festive scenes of society, she faintly smiled, and said, She had, from her infancy, preferred quiet to the more bustling walks of life ; and, as she had a sister, her parents were kind enough to indulge her propensity, and it was now become so familiar to her, that she should find it very difficult to enter into the world again. She obtained in hooks the only solace she could ever hope to receive in this world, and she never should have a desire to leave it. 44 We had a lung conversation with her, on different subjects; in all of them I found her sensible, inteUigent, and hu¬ mane ι her person, though not handsome, was elegant and genteel Her voice was plaintive
í» 1
plaintive and harmonious. She waswhol- ly free from affectation, and, I firmly be¬ lieved, from every vice. I was charmed with her, and, could not help regretting that she was sister to the ignorant booby beside her, who, whenever an opportu¬ nity offered, ridiculed her for her gravity, and played offa deal of his low humour; but she parried it with great good-nature. " We spent the remainder of the day in her company ; wad, when the baths were ready, we retired for the nigh t I had no opportunity of speaking to Mr. Fonthill, before 1 went to rest ; bur, as I laid myself down, I could not help being pleased at the idea of his probablv liking this young lady. I thought he appeared cheerful, and addresed her with a satisfied air. . I frequently observed her look at him with great attention, then sigh deep* ly, and endeavour to suppress the strug¬ gling emotions of her breast. I was at a foss to account for this, as it appeared to arise from a kind of pity* I pusszkd my-.
82 şelfin vatn for the cause ; at kngth, 1 en¬ deavoured to compose myself to rest ; but, whatever was the reason, I could not* 44 A lamp had been placed in a kind of vase, oa the table, that stood at some dis¬ tance from the bed, which was in the European ftyle, and had curtains of India chints, lined with blue Persian. The room was elegant, but appeared as if it had not been used for some time. I Jay admiring the beauty of the decorations, they being the most superb I had seen for some time, though Rosetta abounds with more good houses than any town in Egypt, it being the best built, and most commodious that I have ever visited. At lasa, weary with turning my eyes on dif¬ ferent objects, I lay down on my side to endeavour to sleep. My slave was in sound repose on his mattress—I envied him. 44 I had not been font in that posture, before I thought I heard some one breathe with
33 with extreme difficulty. I listened-*~it was not my slave—his respiration I heard distinctly. I looked around—I neither saw nor heard any one. The lamp, which, just before, burnt remarkably bright, now gave but a very feeble lustre. I thought my visions of sight were hurt, through wantof rest, and 1зу down again. *· Again I heard it; it seemed to me like the struggles for breath of a person dying ; but, thinking, at last, that I must be deceived, or that it might be some nerv¬ ous affection, I tried to think no more about it. Still the lamp appeared to burn dim, and, imagining it wanted to be trim¬ med, I was about to wake the slave, but recollecting he was fatigued, I forbore to disturb him, and turned to compose my¬ self. " I had not lain three minutes quiet, before I felt something, like the hand of a man, grasp tight my left shoulder, and my throat, and, at the same moment, press, with ail his weight, his knees upon my С a body.
34 body. I sprung up instantly in the bed, and awoke the slave. The lamp was scarcely visible ; I bade him trim it, and examine the room, whether there was not a dog, a cat, or some other animal in it. He obeyed my orders, but nothing wab to be found. 44 1 was ashamed of my fears, and ex¬ cused myself, by saying, I thought I had felt one come into the bed. The fellow went to sleep again, and I lay down once more; but I was no sooner settled, than I felt the same, and again was the light ©f the lamp obscured. I strove all in my power to free myself from this grasp, but I was unable to do it, and, for the space of ten minutes, I felt the pressure of the knees and the man's hand at my throat, without being able to extricate myself from it. I heard the hard struggles for breath, which I had noticed first. I thought I tøtøs under the influence of what I have heard the English sailors term the nightmare. At length, I vtfas* elieved from the distressing press ure and
35 and fhe lamp, in an instant, burned as bright as at first. From the beginning to the end of this adventure, it was about twenty minutes, and the time between one and two in the morning. It was gone in a moment, and, soon after, I fell asleep^ ** The next day, I took an opportunity to speak to my young friend, and ask bim How he liked the lady. He said Much better than her sister ; and, if I would have the goodness to speak to Mr. Murray, he should deem himself for ever bound to me· I took no notice of vvhat I had felt in the night, and» when young Murray enquired how I had rested, 1 said Very well. 44 Soon after breakfast, I hastened to tlie Jew's, and there met the gentleman who knew Mr. Fonthill. I apologised for the trouble I gave him,.but begged he vvould have the goodness to inform me What he knew of that gentleman. He said He had known him in India, where he bore the most exalted character ; that С 4 he
he visited him as soon as he came to Rosetta, when he found him extremely ill, and advised him to send for the Go¬ vernor's physician, who was reputed to be a man of great skill. * In consequence ofmy advice,* continued the gentleman, * the physician was consulted, and he gave it as his decided opinion, That Mr. Fonthill had taken a slow poison, and it had so far extended its baneful influence, that it would be next to impossible to counter¬ act its effects, he not being able to ascer¬ tain what the nature of the poison was, or haw fong it had been taken ; but he would give him an antidote that might do him some service. The antidote was accordingly administered ; it was violent in its operations but not sufficient to give any hopes of the patient's recovery ; in consequence of which, I advised Mr. Foothill to make his will, which advice he followed; and the wiU was executed a forthightafter. . ' * , » - <r 4 Previous
/
í
S7
44 4 Previous to its being completed, I had several conversations with him, on the subject of his children. He expressed the warmest gratitude for the care his sister*in-law had taken of them, and told me He had appointed herself and her bro¬ ther, with a Mr. Merso, an Irish gentle¬ man, trustees for his children, whose fortunes would be very considerable; and, further, he had left something handsome to Murray, whom he treated more as a friend than a domestic. " * Soon after this, he died ; but every one was surprised, when his will was opened, to find Murray constituted sole executor, and his children con¬ demned to be unked to those of his ser¬ vant, or forfeit the whole of their pairi?· mony. However, as the will was at¬ tested here in due form, and -it was. noè the business of any one in this country to dispute it, it passed. He was buried, ac* cording to kis desire, in the Frank's bu¬ rial-ground, in this city and a, bandsome С SL- tomb
38 tomb has been erected over him, I had the curiosity to ask a gentleman, who was one ofthe witnesses, Whether he was not surprised at the contents of the will ? He said,* He most certainly was; for, he was positive the one he heard read was di¬ rectly opposite to that which it appeared he signed. He said There was, at the time ofthe execution of it, in the apart¬ ment, the secretary who wrote it, Mur¬ ray, and the three witnesses. The will was in one large sheet, and a copy of it løy upon the table, at the further end of the room. Murray, he said, held another paper in his hand, but what that was he did not know. " 'As soon a« the will was read, itwas kid down, with the other papers, while the secretary assisted Murray to raise his master in the bed ; which done, Murray bid the secretary hold him, while he went and fetched the papers. He did, and Mr. Fonthill signed it, and they did like¬ wise as witnesses. The papers were then sealed
39 sealed up, and put into a cabinet. Tliree days after this, Mr. Fonthill died. The witnesses were sent to England with the will, and Murray opened a concern at Alexandria, with a very great house there, and has, I believe, continued there, ever since his wife and children were removed to that place, except one daughter, who persists, it seems, in continuing here; but it is said she is in a declining states and is not expected to live long. Many who know the family, say, She is the best of them, and every one blames Mr. Fon¬ thill for his partiality to a man, whose fi¬ delity, whatever it might be, ought not to have been so very largely rewarded ; but there is no accounting for prejudices, and especially on a sick-bed/ íť * Are those witnesses now living ?' said L ť One of them is/ said he; * but Avhether the others are, or not, V cannot tell, as I have not seen them these three years ; but the one I know to be living, I will bring to you, if agreeable, as he does С 6 not
4α n$ţ: Hye far from here/ I thanked Ыш for his obliging offer. ** There appeared to me something mys¬ terious in the manner in which the will was executed, and I was resolved, cost wţiat it would, to sift it to the bottom.— Tbiş gentleman I thought I could with safety trust, as he had been Mr. FontLilľs friend, and I did not doubt but he would be the same to his children. I, therefore, щ aş brief a manner as~I possibly could, informed him of their unhappy situation, and how averse they were to the intended union. I told him my sentiments upon the subject, and that I thought the wili would admit of investigation, as there ap* peared to me a strange contradiction in what Mn Fonthill imparted to him, and the ultimate purport of the wilb The gentleman was kind enough to promise me every assistance in bis power, and, as he was very intimate with tbe Governor of Rosetta, and several men of distinction, both Turks and Franks, I did not de¬ spair
41 spair of completing my design. Full of this hope, I requested him to secure the witness, and have the goodness to make enquiries after the others, and to get what further intelligence he could. This he engaged to do, and we parted, appoint¬ ing to meet again the next dav. 44 1 returned to the young people, much satisfied with what I had done. * I found them amusing themselves in the garden. Young Fonthill was quite in spirits, and Miss Murray appeared cheerful* though it was soon evident her cheerfulness was forced. We spent the remainder of the day in viewing the house and gardens. I remarked, as we passed through that part of the mansion where I and my young friend slept, that I was surprised the fa¬ mily did not reside there, and occupy that wing, as it was by much the most plea¬ sant. Miss Murray sighed deeply, and, turning to Mr. Fonthill,said; * My father, Sir, has not been abie to detach himself frorn business long enough to spend any time
42 fímè Here; on that account* as I prefer a aea view, this part of the house has been wholly shut upi* r w * Pho, pho,' said young Murray, who was anxious to catch at any thing to contradict his sister, * that is not the case ; now,. I'll tell you what it is^—the slave» say; The devil walks here, and so they won't come nigh it ; now, as I thought; you being strangers, perhaps the spirit wouldn't like to trouble you, and if he did, you could frighten him away, so I bid them prepare those apartments for you ; now, thaťs the truth on't, and not what Mary, says.' ** All the while he was talking in this idle manner, I observed his sisterunder the-greatest apprehension. She trembled exceedingly, and endeavoured, by every means in her powers to hide her concern. I felt for her, and attempted to laugh at it, saying, I thought him very obliging, to place us in that part of the house, whero we were sure to meet company ; but th* spirit
4$ spirit had not thought proper to make¬ ili mself visible to« me-; artd, if he had to' my young friend, I shpuld suppose he would have mentioned it. 4 Certainly, Sir,' said he ; 4c and I assure you, I never slept sounder in my life/ * Now, an't Γ right?' returned Murray ; 'didn't I tell you, when strangers came, they woulîr frighten the devilaway? ? and He laughed: most immoderately. ** In pity to his sister,.I tried to change the subject, 1?ut Murray would continue it, and, turning to me, said ; * You can't* think how glad I am you came here ; for now, as soon as I am married, I intend to* bring my wife here 5 for I am sure Miss Fonthill cannot faii to like such a devilish' good house, especially as her father died 1 here/ " During this speech, the countenance of young Fonthill underwent every vary¬ ing change, and plainly showed the strong emotions of his heart. He looked at me with a supplicating air, and then at Mur¬ ray,
44 ray, with the most ineffable contempt.-— Hb sister remarked it, and burst into tears. I caught hold of her, for she was nearly fainting. c What the devil atls you, Mary ?' said he. * What new vagary have you got in your head now ? You had better call your slaves, and go to bed/ « İ chid him in severe terras for his rudeness, and said, That, when a lady was unwell, every one ought to be care¬ ful of whafe they said before her, and, no* doubt, the idea of your bringing your wife here, induces Miss Murray to think she shall not be permitted to stay in her favorite retreat, and that gives her such concern. 4 She need not trouble herself about that/ said he -, * she may stay where she is; neither I nor my wife shall trouble her/ * Well, well/ said I, ' have done with thi& discourse; probably, I may have it in my power to offer Mis& Murray as pleasant a house as thia, if she is disposed to leave it/ 4 Thank you, Sir/ said
45 said she, her eyes streaming with tears ; * it is from such hearts as yours, only, I can hope for indulgence for my weakness/ * That weakness/ said I, c does you ho¬ nor, in whatever light the thoughtless and the ignorant may regard it ; but let us go to the other side of the house/ 44 I took her by the hand—my young friend and Murray followed. Soon after, supper was served, and the evening passed cheerfully. I was loath to say any thing to Mr. Fonthill that might be thought parti¬ cular ; we, therefore, retired to rest as be¬ fore. " As soon as I was in bed, I ran over in my mind the occurrences of the day.— I particularly dwelt on vvhat young Mur¬ ray had said about the devil in the apart¬ ments, and, from what I had felt the night before, I thought there was some truth in it. I could not help thinking, that Miss Murray's concern arose from her knowledge of the cause. I was, therefore, determined I would not go to bleep.
46 sleep; For that purpose, I ordered my slave to place the lamp by the bed-side, and a book. This done, he went to rest, and I to read ; but my thoughts would wander from the subject before me, and refer to the occurrences of the day."
СНЛР.
47
CHAP. III. ■ ■ ...... ■ ■ foul deeds v/ill rise, Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes. Hamlet. HERE, the Captain's servant entermg with refreshments, a stop was put to the narration. The repast over* he would have proceeded, but Alphon¬ sus, fearing he would be too much fatigued, requested him to postpone the remainder till the next day. A desultory conversa- tiöft^nsued, and the old gentleman soon after took his leave. In the night, they were astonished to hear a viole л t rapping at the door, and, upon enquiry, found it to be the merchant at whose house they had dined the day before. The door hemg opened, he- en^ tered hastily, and .begged to see them: that
ib that moment. The Captain being ac¬ quainted with his request, desired he would come to him. He came, but to describe his figure would be impossible. He had neither stockings nor slippers; his drawers were in one hand, and a la¬ dy's wrapping gown in the other , on his head, a lady's turban, but wonderfully disordered ; the collar of his shirt open, and no handkerchief. He ran up to the side of the bed, while the servant, in tbe upmost consternation, hastened away to wake Alphonsus. 44 For the love of God, and the Holy Saints," said he, 44 come with me/' t( ^hy," said the Captain, " what is the matter, my friend ? is your house on fire?" , "Oh, Lord ! no," said he ; w worse ihm th t at, a thousand times. Would you Relieve iţ ? but I have again seen young Morland/*-, . " Is that all?" said the Captain; " to puf ypu intp, this hurry jand confusion!" " Why,
49 ** Why, is not that enough ?" cried he* ** I'm sure, if you had seen him in the dark, as I did, you would have been frightened, too 5 therefore, for God's sake, come with me, and speak to him, for I have left him with my wife, and, if he should do her any harm, I should go and hang myself." 44 Well, but/' said the Captain, " I thought you promised our good friend, the priest, to speak to him when he came again." 44 Ay, Lord help you î so I did; but then, I thought he would have come by day, and not just as I was got into my first sleep." At this, Alphonsus entered, and, in spite of his gravity, could not help laugh¬ ing at the grotesque appearance of his friend. ** You may laugh," said he, " and so may the Captain, too ; but, if you had seen him stand close to your bed-side, as he did to mine, you would have been fright·
50 frightened as weh\as rae^—therefore, for the Holy Patriarch's sake, come and speak to him, that I may get rid of him at once ; for, if you don't, I shall be afraid, as I hope to be saved, to sleep in my bed after this, and so will my wife, too, Lord help her! for I've left him with her now." The Captain at this laughed immode» lately : the idea of leaving the ghost with the lady was a conceit so odd, that he could not command his risible faculties : however, as the merchant appeared ex¬ tremely agitated, he got up ; but, before he went. out, he begged him to put on his drawers, and take a nightgown and slippers, and a proper night-cap or hat. Of the nature of his dress he was not aware, till it was pointed out to him : he then threw down his wife's gown and turban, and equipped himself pro¬ perly. They then sallied forth towards his house, aod, luckily, met with no one; but,
51 but, when tliey reached it, the conster¬ nation of his servant was equal to what the Captain's had been, as he had seen his master quit precipitately thè house, and run down the street, but he could not imagine for what purpose ; and he would not venture to ask the lady's slave, so waited his master's return. The moment he entered, he asked for his wife—the fellow had not seen her. " Come with me/' said he, to Alphon¬ sus and the Captain. They begged to be excused, saying, His wife, they were certain, would be more alarmed at seeing them in the room, than at the ghost. " No matter for that," said he ; " I am sure she would rather see fifty living people than one dead one /' he, therefore, took them by the arm, and led them on to the room. He found the door open, but they did not enter. Every thing ap¬ peared quiet, though he was afraid at first to venture in -, but, knowing them to be near the door, he, at length, took courage,
■'- -..oîî . . - cöurüğev Uhd advanced tö the "'.bed-sideí His wife Mé ifi a jiroroünd sleep ; the ghost had not disturbed hér repose, and there was not the least vestige of his having been there. The merchant being satisfied she was safe, examined every part of the room carefully, and then re¬ turned to the Captain. ^ Mý dear Zephäny," said he, " is there, thank God ! and thè abominable man, I suppose, didn't want any thing of her, arid so, when he round me rim âwáy, probably he ran away, too; for, he isn't in the room now, thaťs certain. Oh, Lord! what a fool I was to be so frightened! but, there, 'tis over now, and T1İ tell you all about it, if you will sit down ; for I can't go into bed again. 44 You must know, I was just got info my first sléè|>, foť I hadn't been in be1i%boVe twö höurs> I ám sure, when I was waked by some noise I heard. I fooled гоиШ/ to see what it wä^, but äiére wiàis ^ nofhirığ; sb, I was going to
S3 sleep again, but, in a minute, I heard it repeated; so, up I jumped, but never thought of young Morland, ánd such a light carne itito the room ! and close to my side stood that very man. 1 tried to speak to it ; buti Lord help Ше I my tongue seemed tied. There I sat, shiver¬ ing with fearj and he looking at me. Oh, Lord ! I shall never fofget it the longest day I have to live, I fried again to speak, hu* niy teeth chattered so, 1 could ndt; At last, he held out hfe hands, and I thought he was goring to lay hold of rhe ; so, I jumped out of bed,< caught up something, { don't knovv whatj and out of the house I niri to fetch you. First, 1 thought to go to Father James ţ but, some how op other, % I lost my way, and, when I fo&nd I could not get to him, I came to you*" It wa« vVkh g¥6at difficulty the Captain and Alt&orisiis* eouíd refrain from laugib ing at thb whirfisìèal account ; yet, they could not help thinking seriously on what Vøl. П. D ' kt
54 he had said, and were of opinion that some one ought to be with him, to speak to it, if it came again, as it was evident he never could have courage enough to do it. Tbey advised him not to make his wife acquamted with his real reasons for leaving,her, lest it might give her un¬ easiness ; and, as they did not suppose Morland would come again for that night, they advised him to return to bed, which he at last consented to do, and they left him, with a promise to devise some means to be with htm, when they apprehended it would make him another Visit. In thcir way home, they indulged their mirth, though they were vexed aţ being so unreasonably disturbed. The idea of taking them to his wife's room not a . little diverted them, and they really thought something should be done, to prevent his being frightened a third time. They went to bed again, however, and, the next morning, sent for the Greek priest,
55 priest, and to him they related the last night's adventure, lt amused him much, though he was sorry the merchant did not speak to it, as he had promised.— They had a long talk, and, at last, it was agreed between them, that they would, if he approved of it, sit up with him by turns, till the ghost had been spoken to. This scheme decided on, they went to his house; but he was npt stirring. .From his servants they learnt That the lady's dress had been missed in the mormng, and no one could tell what was become of it ; upon which his lady, being ex¬ tremely angry, had said, They should all be flogged. ** When their master heard this, he told her That he was frightened in the night, had jumped out of bed, put on her clothes, and run away with them to Captain Brindley's house ; but, as she had not missed him, she would not believe it» until he desired her to send one ofher D 2 slaves
56 slaves for the things, who was then gone for them. The Captain bade the servant tell his master they were there, and Father James desired to see the lady. They waited for some time -, at length, the merchant came, but seemed very much disordered. He said, His wife and he had had many cross words, as she would not believe a syllable ofthe malter. 4t But," said he, 4t I am glad you are come, though í Could have lain in bed all day/' The father went fo the lady, and, when he returned, he said He had reconciled all matters, and assured her that her husband bad seen something, and it would be necessary for some one"to sit up with him a few nights, with a view that they might be able to encourage him to speak to it. Fut, if she did not like them to be there, her husband should go to Captain Brind¬ ley's. She had agreed it should be at the Captain's, but begged him earnestly to take care of her husband. Tlie
57 "m The servant just then came back with the gown and turban, and peace was restored in the house. The priest ob¬ served, that the merchant appeared un¬ well, and, on feeling his pulse, found him really disordered. He, therefore, advised him to go to bed, and take something he would prescribe, and he would be with . him again in the evening. He complied with this advice, and Alphonsus and the Captain returned to their house, to wait the coming of the old gentleman On their way home, the priest said He should not wonder if his friend, the mer¬ chant, was laid up in a fever, as thè agitation he had been in, added to the naked manner in which he had run about the streets, in the night, had had such an effect upon him, as to produce every symptom of an approaching illness, for which, he said, he was exceedingly sorry, as he was a very good sort of a man, though he did not possess the brightest intellects in the world. They aH Ь- D 3 mented
58 mented the misfortune, and more so the r unhappy circumstance that occasioned ît. The priest left them at the door, with a promise of seeing them again in the evening. Soon after dinner, the old gentleman was announced, to whom, when seated, they related the adventure of the night. He was much affected at the disaster, fearing it should occasion the merchant's death, as he said such occurrences were very alarming. After a little more dis¬ course, Alphonsus begged him to con¬ tinue his narration. " I think," said he, '* I informed you I was in bed, and had a book before me ; but I could benefit little by it—my ideas wandered strangely. In this manner, I remained till the clock struck one. I hâd neither seen, nor heard, any thing, and began to blame myself for not trying to go to sleep. The lamp burnt very bright, and every thing was still around me, as usual in that climate. Not a breath
59 breath of wind disturbed the trees : all was calm and hushed. I began to think I had been to blame to attend to what had disturbed me the preceding night; but yet, I thought I would keep awake till dawn. I, therefore, took up the book again, and had read, as well as ï could guess, about half an hour, when I awoke the slave, and bade him look at my watch. He did, and said It was two-and-thirty minutes past one. The fellow lay down again, and I read on, I think, about ten minutes, when, in a moment, the lamp became dim, and I heard the loud breathing I had noticed the night before. I sat up in the bed, being determined to be convinced. " I had not been long in this posture, earnestly looking- at the lamp, when I again felt the grasp of the man's hand. I put up mine to remove it from my throat, and endeavoured to jump out of bed, when my curtains drew back, and before me stood the figure of a gentle- D 4 шап,
m man, iip £n English nighfc^dress. I m- stanjly asfeed Who he was, and what he wanted with me ? He made no answer, nor attempted to møve. I repeated my question—atifl he answered not, but made some signs. When I repeated my question, and said, as 1 did not under- stand the signs he made, I desired he would tel} tne What I cowld do to serve him. He drew closer to the bed, and, in a f oice that shocked me, said : 44 4 Thou, Child of Sin and Sorrow, destined by tbe Almighty to avenge the cause of innocence* proceed and prosper : bring the guilty to shame, and let the orph^s find ip thee a friend/ '* f Art thou, then/ I asked, * the fa¬ ther of those children I have sworn to serve ì Art thpu Fonthill ?' * I am,* he repHed, f and in this very room my life was closed by the inhuman bands of the serpent J had fostered—Murray ! ί He administered a slow poison to me, at Bombay, and, wben í arrived here, he put
«ι put the finishing stroke to his jmurderous act. When J had made my will; that secured my fortune to ray children, he substituted another in its stead, for me to mgn, which ho had had long prepared. That done, two nights after, under a pretence of coming to my bed-side/to watch over me, as I slept, he threw his heavy body oa me, and, grasping my throat tight, put a period to that life, which he thought lingered too fong for his avaricious purposes, and my unfor¬ tunate children became the victims.^— Avenge their cause;, and thy sins will be remitted.' So saying, the clock struck t#o, and I fost bim in a mo¬ ment. 44 The lamp instantly resumed its for¬ mer brightness, and I, ky down in the bed ; but it was a considerable time be¬ fore I could compose myself to rest, fa length, I obtained it* and 4 it ê was late in the morning before I awoke. My slave said* That the young Englishman had D 5 been
ш been rety uneasy at my sleeping so long, foaring I had been unwell In the night. I hastened to get dressed, and went to him. The poor youth, when he saw me, was greatly rejoiced. He was indeed afraid I was unwell,« And,* said he, in a whisper, * if you were to be ill, where would my poor sister and myself find a ' friend ? f * Heaven,' I answered, 4 my dear child, fa the friend of every orphan, and will, I hope, bless me with health to see thee freed from all thy troubles, and thy sister, too. Take courage; I am doing something that cannot fail to serve you both/ " He was about to reply, when young Murray came forward. I shuddered, as fae approached me. * Thou art the son of a murderer,* said I to myself» and I shrunk from him; but, recollecting myself, I as¬ sumed a cheerful air, and, when he asked me tíow I had rested, replied, * Very well.' I then asked after his sister. * She is not up yet,' said he; « her slave says She
63 She is ill, and desires to be excused break¬ fasting with os, whifch I am not sorry for, as she never fails to give, roe the vapors; and I am of my sister Ann's opinion, to fly from all such sorţ of people, 1 hate all dismals. 'Tis time enough to be gloomy when we grow old/ " * But your sister,' said I, 4 is unwell, and, therefore, ought to be pitied/ f She unwell 1' cried he, * Lord, Sir ! 'tis only tbe vapors. She has read so, my mother says, till she has stupified her senses, and made herself a fool ; and, if every body else won't do as she does, and whimper and cry at every foolish nonsense, then she gets ill, and we don't see her for a week, or more; and so, my mother, I think, acted very wisely to let her live here ; for, there must have been somebody kept here, to take care of the house ; and, as she would never see any one, since the devil appeared to her* that I told you of yes¬ terday, why, my father thinks it best to let her live here, and cry as much as slue D 6 likes,
64 likes, and, go to* Helyjen her own way, aod then f hem *wW be the niore for sister Ann and me, you know/ * Then/ said I, * your sister did ree the devil, as you call it, did she ?'·*-* Ob, yes, and she told my father of it ; and, would you believe it? he has not been here since, nor mother either, nor will they bear to see her/ ** * But, I am surprised,* said I, 4 that your father should be so weak as to be¬ lieve it/ * Ay/ he replied, 4 and so am I ; but, to tell you the truth, I don't think my father over aod above wise ; for, he believes in all ghosts and apparitions, and on this account, won't be left one minute аюпе ; and, though he is obliged to see Englishmen, I assure you he hates them ; and I have often heard him say, He would not live amongst them again for the whole world, and so great is his aversion, that I am sure, if it had not been Mr. Fonthilľs express desire for his children to marry into our family, my father "would sooner see
65 see us united to Greek slaves; but, you know, he must not disobey the will of the dead ľ 4 True,' I answered, * the will of the dead wjth me is sacred, and so it should be with every one ; and it is a pity that the real designs of the dead were not more religiously attended to-------' *' I was going to say more, but, recol« lecting myself, forbore to. make any fur¬ ther remarks. I was impatient to go to the Jew's, to meet Mr. Fonthilľs friend, and, accordingly, left them shortly after for that purpose. I was beforehand with him ; however, he soon eame,and brought with hirø the witnejss to the will, who confirmed what he had before related* as to the manner in which the papers weise laid upon the table, and Murray's holding one in his hand. He said, He particu¬ larly noticed his turning his back upon them, as he went to the tabic, and hé observed him unfold a paper, which was the one he signed; but, thinking that Murray,
ее Murray, when he put the will hack, had probably folded it up, he did not take any further notice, especially as he knew Mur¬ ray was amply provided for in the one he heard read. , When he was informed of the contents, after Mr. Fonthilľs death, he said He could have sworn that was not the same ; but, when he came to see hisown hand-writing, he could not deny it, nor either of the other witnesses ; there¬ fore, they concluded they must have been 'mistaken in what they heard,and thought " no more about it. " I relied much upon this gentleman's evidence, and asked hiro, Whether, if it was necessary, he would go to Eng¬ land, to prove what he had then said? He readily assured me he would, and, if his evidence could be of any service, he should deem himself happy to give it. He then took his leave. «« When he was gone, I imparted to Mr. Fonthilľs friend аЦ that had passed in the night* He heard it with the great· est
67 èst astonishment, and, to convince him of what I had seen» and that it was no dream, he begged me to describe the figure of the person I had seen at the bed-side, which 1 did minutely, as I could the more readily, on account of his standing so close to me ; and, though I was agitated, yet I was certain that I had remarked every feature, and every article of clothes he appeared to have on. This satisfied the gentleman that it could not be a dream ; and I was too well known to the Jew, at whose house we then were, to be suspected of acting from any sinister mo¬ tives. He, therefore, entered into a plan with me, to discover the-truth from Mur¬ ray, without bringing it into a court of justice, as there was nothing to substan¬ tiate our charge but my owii testimony, and that was so strange a one, that nine out of ten would be led to disbelieve it, and the witness could only go upon pre¬ sumptive evidence· We, therefore, after fong consultation, agreed that I should return
«eturii to Afeücaadrís, see Muitfay trørne^ diately, ta« him with his crimen and threaten him with the vengeance of the laws, ** Thiáwasno sooner decided upon,. »than Twas anxious to put it into practice,, lest arty unforeseen event should prevent my accomplishing- it. - The witness this gentleman agreed to bring with him to Alexandria, the day after I should reach there. * Every tiling being ar¬ ranged to my wishes, I took my leave of him, returned to tbe young people, and informed them my business was finished at Rosetta, aad I was ready to return. 44 Miss Murray was not yet up. I was sorry for the fate of this very worthy girl ¿ however, I had the satisfaction of seeing her in about an hour after my return. She aeemed visibly altered for the-worse $ her appearance shocked me ; and, from that moment» I concluded she would not be long an inhabitant of this world. I ex-
m pressed my sçrrow at seeing her so ill. She smiled, ajid said She welcomed every additional attack of her disorder, as a forwarding step to peace. I endeavoured to persuade her that so 3'oung a lady ought to look upon death as at a remote distance. * To tbe happy, Sir/ said she, f such an idea might be pleasing; but, believe me, when I assure you, that I regard the moment that shall summon me from this world, as the most pleasing prospect I can dwell on. J was never particularly fond of life 9 and, within these two years, I have been more anxious to quit it than ever, and now sineerely hope that rny time here will not be fong ; for, I cannot help saying, with our blessed Saviour, 44 I hope to fly from the wrath to corae/' And she turned her eyes towards røy young friend. 44 I instantly comprehended the whole force of what she said, and was con-' vinced that she knew something relative to
70 to the fate of Mr. Fonthill. I felt more than you can imagine. What she said affected me in a violent manner, and I hesitated to say I meant to return to Alexandria; therefore, did not do it; being persuaded, in my own mînd, that this poor girl was already become the victim of her father's crimes; and the more I regarded her, the more I was convinced she would not live long. I thought it best not to hasten her death by any act of mine, but leave it to the great Disposer of all events to ñx the moment when I was to act; for, to wound still deeper the stricken deer, was what nature revolted at. « Surely/ said I, 4 it cannot be a crime to wait a little while, and see the event of this dear girľs fate/ ** On this reflection, I determined to communicate my thoughts to the gentle¬ man, and let the matter rest a short time. I determined, however, to see him upon it, and get his promise, that
71 that, if any accident should happen to me, before 1 had completed my design, he would take it up, and act as I vvould have done.
CHAP.
n
CHAP. IV. Oh, that my head were laid, my sad eyes с1ол\1, And my cold corse wound in my shroud to rest í My painful heart will never cease to beat ; Will never know a moment's peace till then. % Rows. 44 AS soon as we had dined, instead of saying I meant to leave Ro* setta, I hastened to Mr. Fonthilľs friend, and told him what my ideas were. He was perfectly of my opinion, and con«- eluded that, in the state in which Miss - Murray then was> he had not the least doubt but that a knowledge of her fa¬ ther's crimes being made public would hasten hér end. He thought, as well as myself, it was best to let it rest, till we saw how she was likely to be. If she recovered, we could pursue it without scruple, and, if she did not, it would be more
73 more satisfaction to think we had not aggravated her calamities, arid she could resign her soul in peace, free from any suspicion of what was intended, respect* îng her parent, whom, it was evident, she honored, though she was conscious of his crime. I thought it would be most advisable to stay at Rosetta, and wait.the event, under pretence of shewing young Fonthill all that was remarkable in and near it. This fixed on, I returned to the young people. ** As soon as I came back, I endea¬ voured, by every means in my power, to divert Miss Murray; but, though she listened with complacency, her thoughts^ к was evident, were fixed on some other object. She tried to be cheerful, but in Vain, and I often caught her eye fixed on my young friend, with marks of the warmest pity depicted upon her counte· nance. I told her It was my intention to make sòme stay at Rosetta, as I thought it would be agreeable to her fetheťs charge
74 charge to see th« environs of the city, and to make himself as well acquainted as possible with a country he was come to reside in. * True/ said she; * it is necessary ; but, if I could have prevented it, Mr. Fonthill should never have come to Egypt to reside, as I am led to think he will not like it at all. The customs and manners of the people, their way of life, and amusements, differ so widely from those in England, that I am afraid, notwithstanding the various beauties pf the country, neither himself nor his sister will ever be happy here ; and 'tis a great pity that two such lovely and accom¬ plished persons should be doomed to drag on their existence, in a country so remote from the place of their birth, from all their relatives, and those tender ties com¬ menced in childhood. When rhese re¬ flections strike me, believe me, I feel a сопсетд 'tis not in my power to conceal, «ndl sincerely regret the will of a father, that consigned them to such a fate/ " Here
75 44 Here she burst into tears. She laid a strong emphasis on the word, The will of * A father/ She did not say, I ob¬ served, * their father/ " 4 Then, you rçally, Miss Murray/ said I, ' lament the destiny of those young people Y 4 1 do, indeed, Sir ; for, I always apply it to myself, and reflect how hard I should think it, if the will of my father had consigned me to a foreign country, and doomed me to be united to those, whose temper and habits I was wholly unacquainted with, and who, in all probability, were the direct reverse of what I should have chosen, had it been left to myself. This is my mode of rea¬ soning ; and, as I regard the married state but in two points of view, either wholly miserable, or truly happy, I cannot for a moment admit a medium between tbem. My sister may possess many good qualities and acquirements ; yet, still, she may want the grand essential to hap¬ piness—congeniality of disposition, and mode
7β mode of thinking. Mr. Fonthill ¿eems deserving of a lady of enlarged under¬ standing, handsome person, of family, and . considerable accomplishttients. Neither of tbose requisites does nïy sister possess. She has What is necessary for a mer¬ chant's daughter, but not for a gentle¬ man's wife. I^Ty brother is in the same predicament : our education was com¬ menced too late. Besides, our origin is not equal fo Mr, Fonthilľs, and it is im¬ possible ,for me to admit, for à inomen t, that there *сап be any felicity, when a bear and a fämb are united. We might as soon expect fo find the mariners of an ^European courtier among the Galla, in Abyssinia,.or good faith among the Derri, as happiness with those sõ opposite. I have receded upon ît à thousand times, and it is impossible to say what I feel, wneb ï hear my brother talk of bringing IvTiss #of\íniirBefé äš hi ä wife. I actually accuse fafe s of the most Barbarous par¬ tiality! СЙгГ how sMuld f rejoice to behold
77 behold her the wife of a prince ! But it will be my death, if I see her once my sister-in law. She is, Sir, deserving a much better fate ; but I assure you I do not speak out of any prejudice entertained against ray brother: he would make a good husband to one similar to himself 5 but, if he is united to a person, whose understanding is more enlarged than his own, he will, as is always the case with the ignorant, be continually ridiculing those acquirements, of which he has no conception, and that will only serve to make his own deficiency the more con¬ spicuous. Continual jars will inevitably be the result, and the consequence fol¬ lows : they will despise each other, and an endless life of misery ensues. Then, from those reflections, Sir, have I not cause to be unhappy r' 44 4 You have, indeed,* said I, * .my dear young lady. How few, at your age, reason in this manner ! but I see no way in which those matches can be prevented t Vol. IL E it
7S it was the wül of a deceased parent that it should be só, and those living seem determined to compleat it.' " 'I am sorry they are, Sir,' said she ; * and I sincerely hope I shall never live to see it. I have private reasons like¬ wise for wishing it ; but, till I am no more, they will not be known, and that period, I trust, is not far remote/ *' She seemed very much agitated, and I changed the discourse. In about a quarter of an hour, the young men en¬ tered, and a general conversation took place. I told young Murray It was my intention to take Mr. Fonthill to different parts of the city, if it was agreeable. He entered into it with avidity. I very * warmly urged Miss Murray to send for medical advice, and told her brother that I should be very unhappy if she did not. * I'm sure,' said he, * if Mary is ill, she is much to blame, if ehe do not have the doctor, or let her confessor know that she wants assistance ; for, all the
79 tìie fraternity, they say, are good doc¬ tors/ " She smiled at his observation, and thanked me for my solicitude j but said She thought medicine would not reach her complaint. Still she,had no objec¬ tion to consult a physician : she would, therefore, send for one. We, soon after, left her, and I took my young friends to the citadel, or castle, situated about two miles north of the city. Though there is nothing material to strike the eye in this building, yet it amused Mr. Font¬ hill. " When we had made what observa¬ tions we chose, we returned, and, on our way, met some of the naked saints that are seen in Rosetta. This appearance disgusted the youth, and he could not be persuaded that they were regarded with reverence by any one, much more by the ladies ; but of this he was soon after convinced, by seeing a woman advance to one of them, and, with great apparent E 2 devotion,
so devotion, take his hand, and kiss it He turned from them with disgust, and said It was a pity they were not confined. I could not help smiling at his observa¬ tion, though it spoke the most delicate mind, " The romantic country of the Delta, #n the opposite'side of the Nile, and the beautiful islands below the town, at¬ tracted his attention. Yet, he could not help drawing comparisons between them and the delightful coasts of England. A grove of palm-trees, which we had to pass, pleased him exceedingly, as did the * gardens ; yet, he sighed, and said, Though England did not afford such aromatic sweets, still he should prefer it, especially as the ruins of ancient grandeur, which iare every where to be met with at Alexandria and Rosetta, would never fail to remind him of the mutability of human greatness. 44 4 Those barriers of the eea,* said he# pointing to the hills which surround the town, t
fl town, * put me a little in mind of my native country ; and as I am doomed to live here, I must ^ appose them on the other side to be the chalky cliffs of England ; but I must go no farther. I do not like sandy deserts ; they are not as the large commons in my country, whose herbage affords pasture for so many flocks of sheep and other animals. Besides, 4is green and pleasant to the eye, and you stand in no fear of seeing the road continually shifting, and be obliged to have large stone pillars set up, . to guide your wandering steps. But, if Egypt could be restored to some of its pristine grandeur, those superb edi¬ fices and lofty columns, that lie scattered in all directions, again be reared, and Alexandria be again the resting place of monarchs, and the emporium of the world, then I might be brought to like it; but not till then. I wish the pro¬ phecy, which the Egyptians have con¬ cerning the Eranks, who are to conquer E a them,
82 them, and over-ran the country, could now be fulfilled. I might then be dis¬ posed to stay j but, alas! that is not the case. Still it is a pity that a country, luxuriantly abounding with every bles¬ sing of nature, should lay in the forlorn and deserted state it does. 44 4 Had I the power of a great King, and could send out colonies, instead of exploring unknown regions, and making settlements among savages, I would send them here, and let them, instead of clearing woods and draining swamps, make navigable those wonderful canals, and , again unite Cairo to Alexandria. Let them gather those stupendous blocks of marble, and shattered columns, and form them into houses, which, if not so magnificent as in their primeval state, yet would be better than huts of wood or mud. Let them clear the reservoirs, and permit the fruitful Nile to pour its blessings into them. Those would, be employments worthy of a brave and en¬ lightened
85 lightened people. But, when I look upon the banks of the great canal, and see nothing there but wandering Arabs, and their flocks, who have no ideas beyond the fodder which they obtain for their cattle, my heart sickens, and I in¬ stantly draw comparisons between my ovvn countrv and this. Not but that the borders of the canal, so richly covered with verdure, and adorned with such variegated trees, might, I own, vie vvith our most fertile spots ; but, when I view the camps of those wretched Bedouins, I regret I have it not in my power to draw colonies from my native land, and- try to attach those wandering people to one spot, and, by that means, render them useful members of society. Could this be done, I should tread with rapture on the ground where the great Alexander once resided, and where his mortal part lay enshrined in gold.—And, on this spot, I vvould say, perhaps, Mark Anthony, and the too-beauteous cause of his mis- E 4 fortunes,
84 fortunes, once trod. But, if my thoughts reverted for a moment to the deaths of those wonderful personages; if, in my mind's eye, I beheld Anthony, after all his victories, drawn up by a rope to the window of a tower, to avoid the sight of Cæsar, and behold the beautiful Cleopa¬ tra, after reigning with despotic sway over Egypt, for two-and-twenty years, closing her life in a tomb, besiele the re¬ mains of her hero, I should immediately say: Ah ! how vain are human wishes f how futile their schemes for lasting great¬ ness! Alas! Pompey, when I view the spot where thy remains were burnt, I cannot suppress a tear, or help saying with Solomon : Vanity of vanities, and all is vanity/ 44 As he said this, Murray, who had listened with great attention to all my young friend had uttered, cried : * What, for the love of God» have you been talk¬ ing about? who was this same Mark An¬ thony, Cleopatra, <and Pompey, and all of
m of them? Did they live here? and was he really drawn up by a cord ?' I could not suppress a smile at this speech. * Did you never hear/ said I, * that Alexander the Great was the founder of Alexandria ? that Cleopatra and Mark Anthony put a period to their existence, in that city; and on the edge of a boat, near Pelusium, the great Pompey was sacrificed, after the battle of Pharsalia ; and that, on the sands, his body was burnt by one of liis frecdmen, and an old Roman sol¬ dier?' " e Oh, Lord ! no,' returned he. 4 1 never heard my father talk of any such things. I never was told that any such people ever lived there ; and, yet, I somehow won¬ dered vvhat all them great places meant at Old Alexandria. Why, I should like to have it up again, as it would look grand, and bring a great many more peo¬ ple to live there, and then we should be a vast deal merrier than we are at presents for, I hate chewing opium, and smoak- E 5 ing
sa Щ fottg pipes ; I love dancing, but there's none of that fun to be met with, unless now and then, at the English Coa- suľs or Vice-Consul's, and then there's so much fom is going there ; and my father* somehow or other, don't like to mix with the English. But I hope, when Ann comes home, we shall see more company, and be amused a little in our own way ; but, now, Lord help me ! unless I can get leave to come to Rosetta, and then I do enjoy myself a little, to be sure, among the old Greeks and Jews, and once, now and then, we get hold of a Janizary, and make him drunk; but that's under the lose, you know.' 44 * Then you do not like Alexandria V said I to him. " * No,* answered he. c I should much rather live in England; but, if father don't like it, why, you know I mustn't ; * only, when the old man tips off, I won't stay here, that I'm resolved on·'
44 This
87 44 This conversation is but a small spe¬ cimen of the young man's acquirements, and with such he entertained us, till we returned to the house. It was very late when we came back, and we found Miss Murray retired to her apartment. The slaves said, She had been seized with a, fainting fit, about an hour after we left her, out of which she recovered only to relapse into another. I was much hurt at this account, and asked, W'hether the physician had been sent for? They said, Yes, and he was but just gone, and would be there again in a short time, as he thought their mistress very ill. 44 1 felt the most tender concern for this amiable girl ; for though, on my first seeing her, I thought she appeared hurrying fast to her eternal home,, yet I was led to hope she might, by the help of cheerful com¬ pany, and brighter prospects, soon get better. But, when I had conversed with her the second time, I was convinced E $ there
8$ there was but little hope for my young friend's transferring his regard, or, to speak more properly, his marrying one sister instead of the other. Ptold young Murray, I thought it would be advisable for him to send off a messenger to his pa¬ rents, to inform them ofhis sisteťs alarm¬ ing state ; but he said : * Lord bless you,. Sir; my father woud'nt come here for a thousand pounds -, but, Гт sure, she shall have every thing she wants, and whatever the physician says, we must do/ " * Why, will not your mother, think you, come, if she hears her child is really in danger ?* " * I don't know for that ; but she bas¬ teen so often ill, that we don't now think any thing about it ; for she generally gets weli enough again, in a little time- though I do fancy now she looks worse than ever she did ; but, if I was to send to mother, I question whether she would believe it/ 44 Mr.
44 Mr. Fonthill cast a look of contempt on this thoughtless and unfeeling fellow, > r and, turning to me, earnestly desired t would speak to the physician, and entreat him to use his.utmost endeavours to save Miss Murray. Г promised him 1 would do every thing in my power, but said, 1 was afraid there could be but little hope entertained by the physician, as I was- certain her, complaints were beyond the reach of medicine. " * I am sorry, indeed, then,! said he, * and a|} my hopes of happiness must be for ever blasted/ " * Do not say so/ said I; *T hope there is felicity in store for you, that you, are not at present aware of/ 44 He was about to reply, when young* Murray, who had been talking to a slave, came near. 4 Shallwe go and'see Mary r* said he. * I have heard you say you un¬ derstand physic 5 perhaps you can do something for her.' ť I know not,' said I ; 4 1 wish I could ¿, but I. would not venture to
90 to her apartment, unless she wished it,— But the physician wiil be here soon,-and from him, I hope, we shall hear she is not in any great danger/ * I hope so, too,' «said he. " The baths being ready, we went to them ι but before we had quitted them, we were informed of the doctor's arrival. He had seen his patient, and waited our leaving the bath, to give his opinion.— When we came in, he told us, He had seen the lady, and thought her in extreme danger. The fits she had had in the course ofthe day, were such, as were always re¬ garded as the forerunners of a speedy dis¬ solution. It was not in the power of me¬ dicine to save her, as he was certain the next fit she had would carry her off.— Had the disorder, he said, been checked for half-a-year before, she might have lived ; but then it was too late, and, if there were any friends she wished to see, he would advise them to be sent for im¬ mediately. "We
9Ì 44 We asked him, What he thought her complaint was? He said, It originated from some hidden cause that preyed upon the spirits, and was what the English phy¬ sicians term a nervous fever, and which must be conquered more by the patients themselves, than by the force of medicine* β She is/ said he* * an amiable woman, and a good Christian ; therefore, she is sure of being happier in the world to which she is hastening, than she would be in this.' 44 My young friend, who had listened attentively to the physician, was so much affected at this, that he burst into tears,. The doctor, thinking him her brother, talked to him very affectionately, while her unfeeling real brother sat fike a fool, and neither spoke^nor seemed concerned· At last, he turned to the gentleman,, and said : 4 Then, you really, Sir, think Mary will die ?* « I do, indeed, Sir. The young lady cannot possibly recover.— What I administered to her three hours ago*
ш
ago» ílas not had the desired effect. We cannot counteract the decrees of fate, and I- think, as she seems happy at the idea of soon quitting this life, w'e should rather- * rejpice at those opening prospects of feli- * city, which she certainly anticipates, than. regret her loss/ *' I sighed deeply—my heart was great¬ ly oppressed ;,ýet, I was happy to think К had not in any shape contributed to her illness. The doctor soon after took his leave,, saying, He would be there again in a short time,.and bring another gentle¬ man with him, to whom he should go, and. report her case. *' When he was gone, I desired young, Murray to send a messenger to his pa¬ rents, with the account of his sister, which he at length did. We could not think of going to bed, as all were anxious for the lovely, sufferer. Towards morning, I, however, prevailed upon Mr. Fonthill to lay down. Before he slept, he begged to see Miss Murray,, when she could be brought
93 brought to permit it. This we promised, and hc left us. In about an hour after, the physicians came again. After seeing Miss Murray, they informed us she was then in a sound sleep, and they augured much good from it. Assured of this, young Murray and myself went to bed, though I could not help fearing I should not jie long, and thought I might proba¬ bly see the father of my young friend again. Under these impressions I went to sleep. ** \yhen I awoke, I was informed by my slave that it was late, and Mr, Font- 0 hill wished much to see me. I hastened to the breakfast room, anxious to hear how Miss Murray was. I found the young men together ; from them I learnt she was rather better ; the physicians had been there, but gave not the least hopes of her life. My young friend was much, altered from the preceding day, and seemed to take the illness of Miss Mur¬ ray more to heart than I could have ima¬ gined.
94 gined. I therefore waited, with great irø- - patience, to speak to him alone, but no opportunity offered. " The day moved slowly on, the lady still continuing apparently better. In this manner she remained till the middle of the next day, when the messenger return¬ ed from Alexandria, and brought a letter from Mr. Murray, which was merely to tell the son to get advice for his sister; and, as I was there, to consult me what further should be done ; but they could neither of them think of coming, as they did not see any necessity for it, as she had been so often in such an alarming state, and still got better. 44 4 There now/ said young Murray, * did I not tell you, Sir, that neither my father nor mother would think any thing about Mary*s illness ? so, if she should die, I can't help it ; you see I have done all I can.' « Very true/ said I, 4 you have/
44 About
95 44 About an hour after the receipt of this letter, Miss Murray desired to see her brother. He went, and I took that op¬ portunity to tell my young friend, I could almost promise, with a degree of certain¬ ty, that he would not be obliged to marry the daughter of Murray, nor his sister the son. I begged of him to be more cheer¬ ful, and place an entire confidence in my intentions to serve him. 44 This assurance appeared to give him the greatest satisfaction. Stiil he was un¬ easy respecting Miss Murray. He said, She was the only one of the family he could ever love, and he could not help lamenting, that it should be his misfor¬ tune to lose her, as soon as he became acquainted with her. 4 Whatever may be the decrees of Providence, 1 said I, 4 we must all leam to submit. In the haven of peace she will be happy. You may re¬ member that she told us she had not a wish to recover; and, having such un¬ feeling relatives as she'has, I do not won¬ der
9$ der at it ; for, she is the absolute opposite to them in every thing. I am not sorry we happened tobe here at this crisis ; for, though we are both strangers, yet it may be some satisfaction to her, to see that there are persons in the world who are sensible of her virtues, and would, if it were in their power, make her future life more comfortable than it has hitherto been/ « I should be happy/ said he, * to see her once more, if it were onlv to con- vince her, that I have more regard for her than her parents have. How cruel it is in them not to come to her at so moment¬ ous a period 1' * From such brutes,* said I, ' nothing else could be expected/ ** A slave entered, and desired we would come to her lady. We hastened to the apartment, and found her sitting up in the bed» supported by two women. She held * out her hand, and, in a voice scarcely ar¬ ticulate, said* She had desired to see us,, to thank us both for the humanity we had shown towards her, and the anxiety we had
97 had evinced for her recovery. She beg¬ ged us to remember her in our prayers, and wished us every happiness. u She was about to say something more, when a slight convulsion seized her. She fell back in the bed, and ex¬ pired without a single sigh !!! 4C Thus fled one of the purest and an¬ gelic souls that ever ascended to the Throne of Heaven. My young friend was so much shocked, that it was with the greatest difficulty I could keep him from fainting. I turned, and took a last look at the departed angel, then led the trembling youth from the room of death. " As soon as we were alone, I endea¬ voured to calm his grief. It was a long time before I could, in any degree, com¬ pose him. Young Murray came to us^ he affected to be much concerned at the death ofhis sister i but the unfeeling bru¬ tality he had shown, when she was first pronounced in danger, made me regard bis symptoms of sonow as pretended* From
From his discourse I learnt, That she had sent for him, to inform him what her wislies were, respecting where she was to Be buried. We also learnt That she had been ill a week before our arrival, and, at our coming, was confined to her bed ; but, as her family had been accustomed to treat her illness as imaginary, she had got up to receive us· He said He was very sorry he had jested with her; but as he did not think she was really in danger, he thought there could be no harm İn it, as girls had very often strange vagaries. ** I was hurt at his manner of talking, and hastily changed the discourse by ask¬ ing Where her confessor lived, and whe¬ ther he would be there soon* He said He had sent for him, and expected him every minute. He came soon after. I found him a very old man, of the convent of St. Francis, of exemplary piety, and one in whose conversation you could t?ot feil to find pleasure. He lamented with us the death of Miss Murray, and said, If any
99 any one was certain of eternal happiness, she was ; for, in the eight years he had attended her, he never had the least occa¬ sion to condemn her actions, in any one instance. 4 She has, for several years,' said he, * desired to see the happy mo¬ ment which is now arrived. I have been led to expect it, and I really wonder she has lived so long ; for, in mind, she has suffered much, and that, İ believe all will allow, surpasses the afflictions ofthe body ; and» though she had no crimes of her own to weep for, yet she shed many a tear for those of others. She lived a Saint, and died an Angel. She has ex¬ pressed a desire to be buried in the ce¬ metery of our convent. I have obtained that permission, and as soon as her father and mother can be made acquainted with it, and I have their consent, I shall exe¬ cute the task enjoined me/ 49 * And is my sister, then, to be buried by you, Father?' said young Murray. * If your parents so please,' said the venerable man«
100 man, * Oh! Idare say/ returned he, * they will have no objection ; for, you know, it's no great odds where the dead are buried/ 44 The poor old man looked at him with an air of astonishment. * No, young raan/ said he, * it really matters not, to those, especially, whose souls are at rest, as that of your heavenly sister is. May yours, my son, when you render up your last breath, be as certain of happiness, and, then, you need not care where your body lies. How long/ asked he, turning to me, * do you propose staying at Ro¬ setta ?' f No longer/ said I, c than till Mks Murray is consigned tothe mansions of the dead/ * Then you will leave it,* said he, 'in a very short time. But, be¬ fore you go, I shall be happy to have some conversation with you. You have been, I understand, in Europe, and it is some years since I had the pleasure of converging with one of this country who had travelled there/ " The
101 <v The manner in which he said this> struck me with an idea, that he wished to see me alone. I, therefore, told him I should be extremely happy to spend an hour w r ith hirn, at his convent ; and, as the young men would, no doubt, wish to be together at Mr. Murray's friend's, be¬ fore they returned to Alexandria, I would take that opportunity to wait upon him. * Yes/ said young Murray, * I promised that niy intended brother-in-law and my¬ self should spend a few hours with my friend, before we left Rosetta.* 4ζ Thegood old man shrugged up his shoulders, but said nothing ; and, soon after, lie left us. A messenger was «ent off to Alexandria, with an account of AJiss Murnu 's death. The remainder of the day I spent with the young people, and, at nigiit, retired early to rest. I ac¬ companied Mr. Fonthill to hh apartment; and, as he appeared unwell, i gave him a trifling prescription to compose him, and, Vol* IL F bidding
102 4 bidding a slave stay with him, I went to my room. " As soon as I got to bed, a thousand different thoughts rushed upon my mind ; yet, they were such, as fixed a firm hope that I should be able effectually to serve the orphans. Full of this idea, I dropped asleep* ** At about half pást one, I was awakened by my curtains being thrown back. I started up, thinking that my young friend had been taken ill, and they were come to fetch me to him. I eagerly asked How long he had been worse ; but, to my astonishment, no slave was near, and the lamp again burnt as if it had a veil round ît. * My God !' said I, « I thank thee he is not ill/ ** At that instant, the form of Mr. Font* hill senior, stood before me. He seemed to smile., I felt, I knew not why, a kind of terror. He spoke not, neither had I power to utter a word, He stood fixed to the side ofthe bed ; I looked earnestly at him,
103 him, and he apparently at me. At lengthi 1 summoned courage, and asked him What I could further do to serve him ? * Pursue/ said he, * the steps you are taking, to rescue my orphans from dis¬ grace and misery. Follow the advice of the holy man, and the murderer of my¬ self, and the destroyer of my childrens peace will pay the price of his crimes ; and 1 shall trouble you no more/ * I have sworn/ said I, 4 to be their friend ; and, when I forego that oath, may my own manifold sins never be forgiven 1* 44 He smiled again upon me, and I lost him. I soon after fell asleep.' 44 Nothmg material happened, during the following day ; and, òn the morning of the second, her father's consent having arrived, Miss Murray's remains wefts taken to the cemetery. " In ñve hours after, I saw lhe Father, and went with him to his convent. He took me into the garden, and we seated »ourselves upon a bench. F 2 CHAP,
J04
CHAP. V. ■ τ ι ------------ I pray you al!, Ifyou have hitherto conceaľd this sight» Let it be tenable ib your silence still ; And whatsoever eise shall hap —— Hamlit. 44 ť I HAVE/ ¿aid he, 4 some¬ thing particular to impart to you» at the desire of that angel, whose remains I have this morning consigned to the dust. She informed me, in the last conversation I had with her» That she had every rea¬ son to think you were the sincere friend of young Mr. Fonthill, and, if so, she wished me to say something to you rela¬ tive to him/ I assured him I was, and fully determined to serve him and his sis¬ ter, to the utmost of my power, as I thought they stood in need of a sincere friend
ÎOS friend, and I did not, for some private rea¬ sons, think their guardian was that to them. " í then briefly related what my ideas were, respecting the intended marriages, and asked him Whether he thought Mr. Fonthill had acted right in tying down his children to marry those who appeared wholly unfit for them? 4 1 do not, cannot/ he answered, * think he acted .right, but it is my firm opinion he never meant any such thing/ * How 1* said I ; 4 when his will expressly com¬ mands it r' 44 4 The will of Mr. Fonthill was not what you have been told/ answered the venerable Father ; * though the villany of man has found means to make it appear so.' 4 By what means/ I asked, * could so base an action be perpetrated?' C I will tell you/ said he. ** 'I am a servant of jhe most high God ; and, were I to conceal the bad ac¬ tions of any man, to the ruin of the inno- cent,their miseries would be upon my heaòV F 3 Two
106 Two years ago, I was fetched, in a great emergency, to attend Miss Murray. She had been taken in strong convulsions, and her life was despaired of. I went to her immediately. The fits, in aboqt an hour, ceased>and she became composed. She desired to be left alone with me; the slaves obeyed her, and retired. She then, with the greatest anguish of heart, in¬ formed me, That she had something to impart ofa very serious nature, but which she should require a promise from me to keep an entire secret, till she was no more, or I should hear that her brother and sister were going to Ъе united to the children of Mr. Fonthill : in that case, and in that only, I should be at liberty to disclose it. 44 * This I promised her. She then told rae, That, for three weeks previous to - her illness, she had been alarmed, every night between one and two o'clock, by something entering her room, walking Up to the bed, and throwing aside the curtains,.
IOT curtains. That she saw no one ; yet, by the hard breathing of some person near, which she distinctly heard, she was cer¬ tain something was in the apartment. The first two nights, she thought it was fancy ; but, on hearing it a third time, she ordered the slaves to search the apart¬ ment ; but nothing could be found. This, at length, persuaded her that her imagi¬ nation had been deceived ; and being, the next night, determined to be convinced, she would not go to bed ; but she neither saw nor heard any thing, till morethanhalf after one, when, though she was not near the bed, she again heard the hard strug· gles for breath, but still saw nothing. ** ' She had been looking earnestly for some minutes towards the bed, when the door of her room opened, and a tall elegant figure of a man entered and ap¬ proached her. As he drew near, his countenance appeared as if he had been in strong convulsions. His eyes were starting from their sockets; his hair F 4 seemed
108 Kerned all erect, and one side of his face and neck black. She shrieked aloud; but, whatever was the reason, neither of the slaves came. She asked him What he wanted r He made no answer, and beck¬ oned her to follow him, but she was so frightened, she had not power to stir. He stood at a short distance from her, and ap~ peared by hia looks to supplicate pity. She regarded him attentively, and again asked him What he wanted? He btill made her no answer, but beckoned her. She made a motion with her hand, to sig¬ nify, If he would go on, she would follow. He walked to the upper end ofthe apart¬ ment, and opened a door of an India ca¬ binet that stood there, and drew out one of the drawers, behind which he touched a secret spring. A small door opened, that she had been wholly unacquainted with, and he took from the opening a par¬ cel of papers ; then looked ât her, pointed to them, and she lost sight of him in a momeut* " 4 She
109 ** c She stood for some minutes, lost in wonder and amazement, afraid to go out of the room, or continue where she was* At length, overcome by terror, she drop¬ ped into a chair, and burst into tears. When a little relieved, she went to the cabinet, to examine the papers ; but, to her still greater amazement, no" papers were there. She searched every part of the room, but all in vain. At last, she thought probably the air of the door might have blown them under the sopha. She stooped down to see, but a violent giddiness seized her, and she felľsenseless - on the floor. " 4 She continued there, she thought, for two hours. When she came to her-» self, and could rise, she lay down upon the bed, but could not sleep. That she had seen a gentleman enter and open the cabinet, she was certain, and likewise^ that she saw him take some papers out, and lay them upon the drawer ; but as she could not find them, she was at a loss · to think what it could mean. She was, F 5 therefore,
ПО therefore, determined not to say any thing fo the family; but, as soon as she was a Kttje composed, to search every part of tKe cabinet, and see whether she could not discover the same spring she had seen her visitor open. 44 4 When it was light, she set about examining the cabinet. At length, after gteat difficulty, she discovered the spring. Λ small kind of door opened, and the opening she found full of papers. She instantly took them out. The first bundle contained letters of Mr. Fonthilľs on va¬ rious subjects. The second contained three bonds, given by her father to Mr. F. for a considerable sum, lent by him to her father's brother, a man who had risen from the capacity of a servant, to the command of a ship that traded from Bombay to China. The other papers contained what, she was certain, was the will of Mr, Fonthill, in which a hand¬ some annuity was granted to her father, but not the least mention of his being Appointed guardian to the children, not
m frøratfy thmg relative to their being married into his family. On the contrary, they Were to be under the immediate care of their aunt and her brother ; and not a single syllable respecting whom they were to be united to. She said She read it over and over again, till her senses became distracted. She trembled* to think her rather coujd be base enough to substitute another will in its stead ; yet what could she conclude ? She spent some hours in this bewildered state * r at last, she put the papers up in the place she had taken them from, and, with a mind agitated almost to madness, descended to breakfast. 44 4 The whole of the day she spent in misery. She dreaded the coming of night, lest she should again see the figure ; to avoid which, she directed a bed to be pre¬ pared in the other wing of the house. All the family were then at Alexandria, except three slaves. She ordered one to continue in the room with her, and told them, as they had been often frightened F 6 on
112 on the other side of the mansion, she would not let them sleep there again, but they should continue where she was. This pleased them much, and she went to bed. " * She saw nothing that night, nor for near three weeks after ; but being, one morning, in a small summer-house, in the garden, and sitting, full of thought on the substance of the papers, she was alarmed at observing the same figure she had seen in her bed-chamber, stand¬ ing before her. She was so much shock¬ ed, that she shrieked, and fainted, and, when she recovered, found herself in bed, with the physician and two slaves by her. " 4 At this period/ said the Father, 4 1 was fetched, as they had found her in the garden, as they thought, dead. When she was left alone with me, she gave me the account I have related, with instructions how to open the cabinet, and begged me to take the papers, and make what use I thought
113 I thought proper of them after her de¬ cease. I took them, and they are now in my possession. The day before she died, I had a long conversation with her, and she, though reluctantly, told me That she had reasons to think Mr. Font¬ hill did not come fairly by his end, but could not say more on that head ; how¬ ever, she would earnestly intreat me to go to Alexandria, if my age would per¬ mit, see her father, and threaten to de¬ nounce him, if he did not give up every thought of uniting Mr. Fonthilľs children with his. She said She had had some conversation with her father and mother upon the subject soon after, she had lodg¬ ed the papers in my hands; but they were so much offended with her for what she said, that they had never forgiven her, nor had she ever seen them since. She begged I would see you, and, if I found you were young Mr. Fonthilľs friend, to impart to you what she had told me, show you the papers, and, if possible, get
IU get hel father to comply with the will she found, and send back the young lady and gentleman to England. * ; Thus, Sir, I have, in every respect, complied with the- desire of the poor suf* ferer, who, I sincerely believe, fell a vic¬ tim fo the knowledge of her father's guilt; for, I am certain she died in a full persuasion that Mr. Fonthilľs death was precipitated by him. Now, Sk, have I not reason, from this account, to conclude that it was never the intention, of Mr. Fonthill to marry his children to this man's?' 44 I answered, That I thought he had the most weighty reasons for such a be* lief; and, seeing in him a friend, I in¬ formed him of every thing I had done, and what I had seen. He heard me with the greatest astonishment, and agreed to go with me to the English gentleman's, and he took the whole of the papers with him. When we reached there, and had fully discussed the business, it was agreed that
íiä that I should return the next day to Alex¬ andria, and they would fottow the day after; wheri, in conjunction with me, they were to pursue measures according¬ ly. This important point settled, I took my leave, and, the next morning, I left Rosetta with the young people. " We did "not reach Alexandria unffï the second day. I found Murray and his wife more pleased than sorrowful at the death of their daughter, who, they .said, had been a plague to them a long while ; and they were happy, in one sense, that she was gone, as she was always wishing to die, and, by her melancholy ways, made every body unhappy that was near her. On thaf account, they did not choose to see her for some time. ** Mrs. Murray said, She was sorry that Mary happened to die while I was there ¿, for, to be sure, such things were rather dull; but that dullness* she hoped, would soon wear away, now I was come back to company. I enquired after Miss Font¬ hill·
ш ЬШ. She was very well, Mrs. Murraf said ; only so mopish, that she did not know what to do with her, but now she supposed she would be merrier. I made no remark, further than by saying I hoped she would. " My young friend, who had continued very pensive, seemed to revive at the sight of his sister. When old Murray addressed me, it was with the greatest difficulty I could answer him ; however,, I conquered my dislike, and conversed a short time. I took a moment that offered, to whisper young Fonthill to tell his sister,. That, in a few days, she would hear what would be done to prevent her being united to Murray. I soon after left them. "When I got home, I ran over in my mind the most proper method to proceed, and, at length, fixed on one, which was To go with my friends, when they came, immediately to the house of Murray, and, in their presence, tax him with his villany. '"':■ ' : V' ■■■'This;"
117 This point being settled, I retired torest; The nexl day, I had the satisfaction of seeing the gentleman, the good priest, and the witness, enter my apartment. I told them in what manner I had proposed to act; it met their approbation, and, in about an hour, vve went to Murray's. 44 We found him at home ; but to de¬ scribe bis emotions, on seeing the gentle¬ man and the witness, would be wholly out of my power. Every varying passion of rage, guilt, and terror, agitated him by turns. I hastened to tell him the purport of our visit, and showed him the bonds, letters, and will, at the sight of which he fainted. When he reco vered, I told h ¡mThat it was not our design, out of regard to his deceased child, to make his guilt public ^ but, if he would make what reparation was in his power, and acknowledge that the will I then held in my hand was the one Mr. Fonthill thought he had signed, I did not doubt but young Mr. Fonthill would confirm the annuity granted to hin* by
r 118 by hís father, and I would, in conjunction" with the gentlemen then present, take care that his disgrace should not be known in that place, nor at Rosetta. He was silent for some moments. At length, he said, If we would enter into an engagement, that he should not be brought to public justice, he Would do every thing that *we required» This we readily consented to, and he then made a full confession of his guilt, and desired us to take the young gentieman and lady immediately under our care, and he would render up a true account of all Mr. FonthhTs effects in his hands, and should only beg that he might be permitted, with his family, to leave Alexandria before we took possession of it. This we all agreed to, but stipulated that one or the other of us were to remain with him, till it was done. This he like- * wise consented to, and the English gen¬ tleman was fixed on for the person. 44 Three days after, he delivered in his account, and with it his full confession» and
ПО and it was then agreed That he should leave Alexandria, the week following, for Cairo, as he did not like to return to Eu¬ rope. But,in the evening of the next day, he was found dead in a small closet adjoining his wife's dressing-room, having put a period to his existence with a pen¬ knife. ." I need not say what was the conster¬ nation of his wife and son, when his death, with the other discoveries, were made known to them ; but we soon recon¬ ciled her, by saying, That the annuity would be granted to her, that Mr. Font- hili designed for her husband. As for young Murray, he said, He was only scrry for hie sister Ann, as she had reckoned much upon being Mrs. Fonthill,^efore she Went to England ; but, for his part, if his father did do all them bad actions, why, it was better for him to die as he did, than live to plague them ; and he did not much mind losing Miss Fonthill, for she was such a grand iady, and was always crying, * * more
more especially, as he had seen a Greek at Rosetta, he liked a deal better. 44 Thus did this ignorant and unfeeling young man show his concern for the accumulated evils that had come upor* his family. A full account was imme- diately remitted to England, and, in two months after, I had the happiness of seeing the young Mr. Fonthill, and his lovely sister, leave Alexandria, under the protection of the English gentleman, who had so kindly assisted me, and the wit¬ ness to the will, who had been in England once before to prove it. Mrs. Murray and her son left Alexandria before that period, for some place in the Levant, but where I do not recollect. I was in¬ formed by my young friends, on their arrival in their native country, That Miss Ann Murray had left the school she had been placed at, with a young ensign, in a marching regiment, but they could not tell where she then was·
« Thus*
121 * 4 Thus, gentlemen, have I related a circumstance, which I regard as the happiest period of my life, I being an humble instrument in the hands of God to save two innocent young people from destruction, and bring the guilty to shame. It plainly proves, That, however secretly a murder is committed, sooner or later it is sure to be discovered, and that, by means the most unaccountable to human reason ; and I have not the least doubt, that the merchant is pointed out by Omnipotence, as the means to discover some fraud or guilt, at present hid from the knowledge of man/* They were all of the same opinion, and returned him their warmest acknow¬ ledgments for the recital he had given. They requested him to oblige them with as much of his company as he could. He said He certainly should be as often with them, as the short time he had to stay at Smyrna would admit; but the time was near approaching for him to leave it for
122 for Alexandria, or Joppa, he did not .know- which. He took čoflfee, and, soon #fter> left them. When he was gone, tibe Captain and Alphonsus had a long conversation on what he had related, and they were both more bewildered in conjectures of who he could be, than ever. That he was a man of very great understanding they were convinced. He spoke several languages, and each with nearly as much facility as the natives. It was late when their conversation ended, and they went to bed, with a firm hope that they should not be again disturbed. The next day was spent by Alphonsus m attending Captain Brindley to several places of merchandize, and seeing a great deal of his cargo, that was destined for Europe, deposited in the warehouses belonging to the Franks. They went likewise to enquire after their friend, the merchant. They found him extremely Ш; the fever was got to an alarming height,
Ï2S height, so that Father James had not been able to leave him. He raved in¬ cessantly, and seemed in agonies, if he ч was ieft but for a moment, for he was still possessed with an idea that young Morland was near him. With 'much concern, they returned home, and the Captain told Alphonsus That he should soon be under the necessity of leaving him, as the cargo was getting on board ; and, as there was, by a Venetian just arrived, a report that a- war was likely to break out between England and France, he should hasten his return to the former kingdom as fast as possible. But he should leave him now with more satisfaction, as the old gentleman would, he was certain, be his friend, and the merchant, when recovered, would like¬ wise visit him, unless % Alphonsus chose to go to England with him. But, as the Captain would be obliged to touch at Lisbon, to take in wines, he declined that
124 that offer, but intreated him to make all the enquiries he could with safety after the surgeon, and his other friends. Capt. B. asked him, Whether he did not think it necessary to send a message to the Convent of St. John's, agreeably to what was pointed out to him in the letter. This he acquiesced in, as he thought he might, by that friend, hear ■something about his wife and faniily.—- He accordingly wrote, on a slip of paper : " Let Alphonsus of Coimbra, bc 44 visited by the Father who attended him " last/* This the Captain promised faithfully to deliver, and likewise to make every enquiry possible, and to remit a full account to him by the first vessel that should sail from Lisbon for the Levant. Every thing being settled between them, Mr. Brindley recommended Alphonsus, in the strongest terms, to his friends, and the
125 the old gentleman, whom he begged to be with him as much as possible, as he said he was a man of sorrows, and the happiness of such a friend's conversation would not fail to lighten his afflictions. In a few days after this, the Captain sailed.
Vol. П,
G
CHAP.
126
CHAP. VI. O qu« beatam Diva tenes Cyprum, et Memphin carentem Si thon ia nive, Regina, sublimi flagello Tange Cbloen semel arrogantem. HORACF. ALPHONSUS felt the absence of his friend in the most acute manner ; he seemed to have lost his better half.— He shut himself up in his apartment for several days, and obstinately refused to see any body; even the old gentleman was denied admittance. But, at last, he struggled with his griefs, and again per¬ mitted the venerable man to see him. His counsel and advice soon composed him, and he visited with him several places of ancient note in the environs of Smyrna. In
γη In about a month after Mr. Brindley* had left them, the old gentleman per¬ suaded him to accompany him as far as Melasso, on his way to Joppa, as he had some reasons for going by land to that place. Alphonsus consented ; it was in¬ different to him where he spent his time, as he found it impossible to obtain peace of mind, go where lie would. His com¬ panion tried by every possible means to divert him, but his borrows were such as would not admit of alleviation. Add to this, that he frequently suffered much from violent pains in his head, occasioned by the hurt he received at the time of the earthquake ; and, though hii» friend did all in his power to render the journey agreeable, yet the wretched Alphonsus could not divest himself of that awe, whieh his presence first inspired him with, when he met him in the church.— Several times he would be about to enter on the subject ofhis griefs, and as often he would find a secret impulse check G 2 him,
128 iiim, which he could by no means ac¬ count for. At Ephesus, they stopped, and walked out to view the beautiful remains of this once-famous city. Having surveyed every thing of moment, they proceeded to Melasso, which town they reached, but the poor Alphonsus saw nothing to divert his mind : it still wandered to Lisbon, still reverted to his misfortunes. His wife, his child, his mother, sister, brother, all passed in continual review before him ; and, though he valued the old gentleman, yet Ье' was not so much at liberty in his company as he was with his friend, the Captain. With him he talked ofhis troubles, and formed schemes again to see his Alzira, but to this friend he could not. He was a stranger to his griefs, and he found it impossible to impart them to him; his days were, therefore, spent in wandering about, wherever his companion chose to take him, and his nights in unavailing sorrow. Being
129 Being unacquainted with the Turkish language, and the Lingua Franca spoken in all the towns of the Archipelago, he was unable to derive any satisfaction from the visits he paid with his friend ; but he was soon informed by circum¬ stances That he had come there for the express purpose of sending home some Christian slaves, whom he had caused to be redeemed. Amongst them were two French wo¬ men, and one man, who were persons of consideration. Tbey lodged at the house of a French merchant, a very cheerful and agreeable man. He had two sisters. who resided with him, and an English lady. All of them spoke the English language, and, as Alphonsus knew more of that than any other, they politely con¬ versed in it. He found them merry, good-humoured girls, and disposed to obtain mirth from every little circum¬ stance. They soon informed him That a Turk of distinction had become violently G 3 capti-
no captivated with the young Englishwo¬ man, but was wholly at a loss to discover his passion. However, they had under¬ taken to instruct him in the English art of making love, and they were sure ŕt would be a fund of great entertainment to them, especially as the lady was al¬ ready engaged to one of her own country¬ men, then at Constantinople. She was so passionately fond ofhim, that she could not bear to hear a kind word from any one else, and was always writing to or about him. Some of her verses, they said, they had, and were taking great pains to make the Turk comprehend their meaning, as they wanted to knovv what he would say when he found he had a rival. Having heard much of the jealousy of the Turks, Alphonsus advised them not to pursue their frolic ; but they were too much bent upon it, to listen to reason, and accordingly, a few days after, they took some poetry of the lady's writ¬ ing, and laid it in the Turk's way, and took
131 took care to be by, to explain the mean¬ ing. Those lines, which were supposed to be written in England, Alphonsus got sight of ; they ran thus : Phœbus has now the horizon forsook, Pale Cynthia trembles in the silent brook ; Each nymph and swain, who, erst their labour plied, Are to the village and their cottage hied. Each fleecy charge, the shepherd's early çare, In Folds are gathered, and for sleep prepare, Whose gentle bîeatings float along the sky In liquid streams, and in soft accents die. Each distant echo vibrates the sound And brings İt back to me On ballow'd ground.* No pois'nous reptiles now my steps invade-; I can with safety sit beneath the shade Of weeping cypress—and the mournful yew, Sad suited to my thoughts, when lost on you. Th' Athenian bird alone does serenade, Break the soft silence, and my ear invade. My pensive soul can scarce a murmur bear, Lost to all joys, since Strephon is not here— ï now am left to ruminate at large, A female Anchorite—and Nature's charge.
G 4 Not
Kot e*oï a Éacödy to whom I un împart Tbe j^rtoïbatio^ Whose^^ syinpathizbg soul wou'd with ще bear, And echo s!gb for sigh, and tear for tear— í erst was wont to join the mirthful throng, Or mix in dance, or trip the meads along, With virgins artless, innocent, and gay, And fustic swains stiU truer than the day-—· Those joys are tîed— for me no more is fouhd A charm in dance or music's cheerful souhd—■ AH that did once my virgin bosom warm Can now no longer please, no longer charm- To books 1 fly, and, underneath thé shade Qf gloomy foliage, dry my tcaw, and read Of some poor orphan, amiable as fair, Who, had she Ьеф less good, had known less care— The story read, the book ï throw aside, And to the margin of a brook I glide, On whose smooth surface 1 was wont to trace The dear resemblance of my Strephon's face» Then, from the btanches of a willow near, Take a sád wreath, and bind my flowing hair- That done, address the great Almighty Jove, Одсе more to bless me with the youth I love. These verses amused Alphonsus much ; but he thought the lady, by the dbmal strata of them, had been for* saken
%33 saken Ъу the object of her passion* But this, the young Frenchwoman as¬ sured him, was not the case ; for he was as constant as any ofhis nation could pos¬ sibly be ; and she was certain they would be married in about a year, if the Turk did not supplant him, though of that there was no fear, as the young Englishwoman ran away from him every time he came. She was frightened at his beard ; and, as they meant only a little amusement, they begged Alphonsus to join with them, and assist to make the Turk comprehend the poetry. This he promised to do, pro¬ vided it would not give the lady any un¬ easiness. In the afternoon, he saw her ; but the Turk coming in, she ran away. The girls then got close to him, and explained the verses, and convinced him he had a rival. This agitated htm greatly, and the grotesque faces he made diverted them beyond measure, and they laughed immoderately. This affronted him. They endea-
IS4 endeavoured to appease him, by sayirig They only laughed to think he could not find the means to supplant his rival ; but his gravity was offended that they should laugh at what gave him so much unea¬ siness. Hpwever, they persuaded him, at last, that the only way to gain the lady would be by paying his court to her, in the same way that the English did, and they would, that evening, give him an opportunity to try, by leaving the lady alone in the parlour, when he should take advantage of it, and make known his passion, but by no means to take a. de¬ nial. At last, he came into their scheme,. and agreed to act as they had pointed out. But Alphonsus saw it was wbat the Turk did not altogether approve. However, they contrived to get the lady into another room, and, under some pre¬ text, left her, and returned to him. They then hastily desired he would go to their friend, as she was alone. He accordingly followed
135 followed one of tht girls to the room, at the door of which she ieft him. He en¬ tered; and she returned to Alphonsus but he had not been gone many minutes, when in rushed the Englishwoman, with her face like scarlet. She threw herself into a chair, and exclaimed : 4( How could you do so, to send that nasty, beastly, long- bearded Turk to me ? you know I hate him ; but I don't care, I've pulled his beard for him ; I'll warrant, he'll never want to make love to me again." One of the girls ran to the parlour to , speak to him, for it was plain they did not think she would have behaved so rudely. Presently they heard his voice very loud, and the lady trying to pacify him. But all would not do ; and, after a deal of altercation, he left the house. She then returned, and said, She was very sorry her friend had pulled his beard, for that was the greatest affront she could have put upon him ; but the young Eng¬ lishwoman vindicated her conduct, and G u said,
136 said, She would have served fifty Turks so, if they had offered to kiss her. The old gentleman came to them soon after, and to him they laughingly related the story. He was seriously hurt, and told them He was very sorry for what they had done, as there was not the least doubt but that the Turk would be highly incensed, and that might be the means of giving unea¬ siness to their brother, whose connexions were such, as could not dispense with his good offices. This alarmed the girls, and they begged ht would go to him and make their peace, before their brother was acquainted with the fracas. This re¬ quest he complied with, and left Alphon¬ sus there. He was gone a considerable time ; at length, he returned, and said He had suc¬ ceeded, but earnestly besought them not to venture on such a frolic again, as it was dangerous to irritate men in power. TTieypromiscdto follow his advice, and, soon
137 soon after, Alphonsus and his friend left them. On their way home, the old gentleman told Alphonsus Thathe had found the Turk extremely enraged ; for the lady bad pulled his beard, and called him a great beastly fellow, and he was certain that the French girls had persuaded her to behave so, and, if that was the case, he should call their brother to account for the affront. But he had assured him it was not designed as an insult, but a real intention of the girls to serve him. This had set all matters to rights. " This Turk," said the old gentleman, "is a worthy man, and has rendered me many good offices at the Porte and other places» I should have been very unhappy if any misunderstanding had taken place be¬ tween him and the merchant ; but girls are giddy, especially of that volatile na¬ tion. Were you ever in France?" " Never," returned Alphonsus. " I have seen but little ofthe world, and that little
1 138 fittle does not at all please me. w 4t 1 wish," answered his friend, " I hád seen as Httle of it as yourself j but I have more reason to wish so respecting France, than any other nation. I was, unhappily for my peace, there once for a consider- able time, and unfortunately imbibed many of their vices." 44 Do yon think," asked Alphonsus, 44 that the French are more vicious than their neighbours ?" ** Yes," answered he, ** I do ; but it is more owing to the dia¬ bolical tenets of their philosophers, and the indulgence granted them by their clergy, than to any natural propensities to vice. Not but that they have the same in¬ clinations as other men -, yet, were they not indulged in their follies, and coun* tenanced by the court, they would not have the same incentives to act as they dos but, when their most learned men will, in spite of the thunder of the church, propagate doctrines that set morality at defiance, is it to be wondered at that youth
139 youth of both sexes run into excesses it Human nature, in all countries and in all stations, pants for liberty to follow their inclinations, however vicious. They are, therefore, happy to catch at every thing which allows them that liberty. You have heard, no doubt, of their Voltaire and their Rousseau; two men that have done more real injury to the cause of Religion and Virtue, than all the works of the greatest divines ever did good. Youth* the season for voluptuousness, listens eagerly to every thing that will, in any shape, sanction the indulgence of their appetites. Thus, they read books on a system of philosophy, which their cele* brated writers hold forth, and which ac¬ tually deny the existence of a Saviour. They say That man ought to act from reason only ; and, as it is absurd to sup¬ pose that the soul is to be punished for the sins of the body, it matters not what men do, so that their actions do not im¬ mediately militate against the order of society·
Ï40 society» Gay and giddy youth reason on that scale most consonant to their wishes, They argue thus : If so wise a man as Voltaire can set a hereafter at defiance, and indulge himself in every criminal pas¬ sion, certainly we might be allowed to do the same with impunity, who have nei¬ ther time, nor capacity, to examine whe¬ ther we act from right or wrong princi* ples. One leading man of fashfon avows these sentiments, and a legion follow. This, in time, is embraced in regular gra¬ dations bty the lower class, and, in the end, the whole nation becomes infected, as if by enchantment, and there will not be found, in a few years, a man, under such circumstances, that will stick at the execution of any crime, so it will m nny shape contribute to his gratification. I have known it exemplified, and can speak from conviction," At this expression, his countenance bespoke the greatest agitation; but he aoon recovered himself, and proceeded. 44 I have
ш 44 I have made it a point, for many years past, to have as little connexion with people of that nation as possible ţ but circumstances will arise sometimes, and oblige men to act contrary to their better judgment. This merchant, whose house we have just now left, is one of the best ofhis country. He has lived long in this part of the world, and is well ac¬ quainted with the method of ransoming ibe Christian slaves, that are frequently sold at different place, up the Levant; and, as I have occasionally opportunities to redeem some, I make use ofhis know¬ ledge for that purpose. I generally see him once a year, and, each time, he rises in my esteem. He has now three of his own country in his house, recently re¬ deemed, who are about to return to their native land. They were taken three years ago, and have suffered a great deal. He has rendered them many services, and I hope he will, one time or other, meet his reward/ 1 (t I hope
142 " I hope so, too," said Alphonsus» " I do not like the French. I have heard much of them, but never had a desire to go among them. Some family reasons implanted a disgust on my mind, and 'tis what I never shall conquer." The old gentleman looked earnestly at him. " May I ask," said he, u of what nation you are ?" Alphonsus hesitated to tell him, but, at length, said he was from Portugal. " I thought as much/' said his companion/' " I had forgot you told me you were at Lisbon t at the time ofthe earthquake." Alphonsus, whose bitter griefs were aU awakened by this speech, felt a violent trembling seize him. He would have re- m plied, but could not. The old gentleman observed 4 the strong emotions of his soul, and eagerly begged pardon for calling up a remembrance of his sorrows. He en¬ deavoured to change the discourse, and Alphonsus to be composed, but both were vain. Tlie poor old man, it wa& evident, wished
143 wished to lead Alphonsus into a convex «ation upon that subject, and he as anxi¬ ously wished to avoid it. When they got home, Alphonsus made an excuse, and retired to his room, where he spent many hours in tears. He could not reconcile himself to his companion, though he saw nothing in his behaviour or his actions but a most exemplary pattern of goodness. " I will return to Smyrna/* said he to himself. " I cannot be at rest here. I cannot think of going to Joppa. I will tell this wonderful man so ; I will say I am anxious for letters, and that will plead my excuse ; he will not mind my leaving him. Would to God I could in> part to him my story, or he would let me know his 1 Why cannot I so readily make a friend of him as I did of the Captain ? Why not speak to him of my Alzira, of my suffering parent ? It would relieve my tortured soul. Oh ! that I had but the poor old Benedicta ! she would pity me, and speak consolation.——Qh! thou Eter¬ nal
ÌU nal Pømr f** said he aloud, ** that guidest the universe, and regardest with compas¬ sion the meanest reptile, deign with an eye of pity and commiseration to behold me. Leave me not a prey to my own dis¬ tracted thoughts, but send some friend, on whose bosom I may repose, and pour forth the anguish of my soul ; or else, enable me to consider this good man now with me, in that light. Divest me of the dread I have of him, and teach me to regard him as a father and director ; he is that to many, then why can he not be so to me ? I will seek his confidence, and do thou, oh, God ! inspire me with cou¬ rage. His knowledge of the world and the baseness of mankind will set my er¬ ring spirit right, and teach me how to bear my misfortunes with calmness. He will perhaps instruct me how to obtain that peace, which the villany of man, and not my own crimes, has robbed me of.— But, if it be true, that I am to be punish¬ ed for the crimes of my parent, and the miserable
Ï45 miserable Alphonsus must be the trem¬ bling victim of the house of Aranjuez, let me, oh, thou Eternal Being 1 be the last sad sacrifice to a father's guilt. Hear me, oh, thou merciful God ....." He was about to proceed in his sup¬ plications, when a violent noise in the adjoining room, which was his compa¬ nion's, alarmed him. He sprung from his knees—He thought he heard a groan—he listened—all was silent* At last, he called a slave. " What noise," said he, ** is that?" ** I heard nothing?" answered the fellow ; ** but something fell down in the other gentleman's apartment." *' Send there," said Alphonsus, " to see what it is, and let me know." The man obeyed him, but came back in a violent hurry, and said, The old gen¬ tleman was fallen on the floor, and lay, to all appearance, dead· Alphonsus flew to the spot ; he caught him up—he chafed his temples, and the slaves ran different wayr r assistance ; but all his efforts were
Ϊ4β wpre vain. At length, a physician came, who hastened to open a vein, and, after some minutes, the blood flowed slowly, but he discovered no appearance of rea¬ son for near two hours, when Alphonsus had the happiness of hearing his voice.™ He looked earnestly at him, as he held his head, then fetched a deep sigh, ahd faint¬ ed again *v The doctor was more alarmed at this, as it appeared that the presence of Al¬ phonsus occasioned it ; he, therefore, de¬ sired him to leave the apartment ; and if, when his companion recovered, he ex¬ pressed a wish to see him, he should im¬ mediately be fetched. Alphonsus reluct¬ antly consented; he retired to his room, aud traversed it in the greatest agitation, every minute listening, to try if he could hear the voice of his aged friend i but, for more than three hours, he remained in suspence. At last, the physician came to him, and said, His patient was recovered, and pretty well composed. He added, that
147 That the fit he had had was very alarm¬ ing, but he hoped, in two or three days, he would be perfectly restored. He would not advise Alphonsus to go to him, as he was much agitated when he men¬ tioned it, and had declined seeing him, until he was better. Alphonsus was satisfied with this ac¬ count, but passed the following night, and the next morning, under the greatest apprehensions of a relapse, and he was every minute in expectation of being sum· moned to him. Tired with waiting, he sent his slave to enquire, Whether he might be permitted to visit him. But the man came back, and said, His servant supposed him to be in a sound sleep, as he had not seen him since early in the morning, when he was much better, and ordered him to leave the room, saying, He would summon him when wanted. Sa¬ tisfied with this, Alphonsus waited two hours longer ; finding, however, that the servant had not been called, he grew very
HS very uneasy, and ventured to the room himself; but, what was his astonishment, when he found his friend was not in bed, npr in the apartment ! On the table lay a letter, directed to himself: he opened it eagerly, and read:
СНЛР.
i 49
CHAP. VII. The cries of my remorse will sotmd for ever Within my tortured bosom. I shall view '■ ' a brother's angry shade- Distract my days, and terrify my dreams ! In every place will vengeful furies rise, In dread remembrance of a brother's murder. Hoole. 44 PARDON a poor old man, who thus withdraws himself from your society. Sorrows, too great for utterance, » oblige him to quit a place, and a man, whom, if he had a thousand lives, he would sacrifice to serve. He is very ill, and his afflictions press too hard upon him to say more. The hand of Heaven will, he trusts, direct him, before his aged eyes are closed for ever, once more to behold Alphonsus ; but, if it is his fate never to see him more, yet he may depend upon again hearfog from him, wherever it may be that Heaven shall direc* his wretched Vob.H. H steps.
150 steps. He begs, he implores Alphonsus, to forgive the abrupt departure of an old man, whose vices, and those of his father, have doomed him a wandering fugitive. Farewell ! pity and rçmçmber him, whom thou canst not look on without horror ! ! !" Alphonsus read the note again and again. He dwelt on every word, as if it was the force of magic. " Remember him, whom thou canst not look on with¬ out horror," struck him in a particular manner. ť * Why," said he, " cannot I regard thee without horror ? why not let me be thy companion ? why not intrust me with thy sorrows? I would have im¬ parted mine in return, and we would have drank together the cup of misery, even to the very dregs; for, thou seernest doomed, like me, to suffer for the sins of a parent. Stay, then, thou good old man; i will conquer the awe which thy pre¬ sence inspires, and wander with thee-, even to the wide expanse of other. Yes, I will follow thee; thou shalt not fly me. 'Tis plain thou knowest the workings of # my
m my soul. I will seek thee, ľ will confesa my fault, and beg to be forgivem" Thus saying, without speaking to the people in the house, he hastily quitted it, and went directly to the French mer¬ chant's, as he did not doubt but his friend was gone there, as there was not another in the whole place, except the Turk, with whom he had the smallest, intimacy. But great, indeed, was his surprise» w-hen he found they had not seen Mm. They hast¬ ened to Muley Yousef, but he had not been there. From thence, they went to the port, and examined every vessel, but he was no where to be found- Slaves were dispatched different ways, but not one of them could gain the least intelligence, and, after four hours fruitless Search, it was given up; no person had seen him since he ordered his servant to leave him. Alphonsus was like a man distracted ; he walked upon the strand, watching with eager anxiety every boat that went in or H 2 out
ш out the harbour, till a Turkish sentinel came, and bade him leave the place, as none was permitted to stay there after a certain hour. He very reluctantly returned to the house. The merchant and Muley Yousef did all in their power to compose him, and assured him they had not the least doubt but that he would soon see his friend again. But this they said only to comfort him; for, they had no hope themselves, he having taken his departure so suddenly, and, though ill, without any attendant, they were fully persuaded some uncommon reason had induced him to absent himself. They had known him for many years, but never remembered his acting in so strange a manner. Alphonsus learnt frora their discourse, That the merchant had been employed by him, solely, for above ten years, to redeem Christian slaves, to feed and clothe them, according to their quality, and see them sent safely back to their native country. Those whom he then
153 then had in his house had been redeemed by him. Alphonsus asked them, Whe¬ ther they knew of what nation he was ? they answered, No, but they were led to think he was a Spaniard or a Portuguese. This account bewildered more than it sa¬ tisfied him. The French merchant re¬ quested he would accept of an accom¬ modation İn his house,during his residence at Melasso; but this he declined with thanks, as company, in his present state, was disagreeable ; he, therefore, chose to stay where he was, while the search was making. Above three weeks passed, and no in¬ telligence had been obtained, when he was one morning surprised, by a sailor, belonging to aVenetian vessel, calling upon him, to inform him, That they had taken up, about eight leagues off at sea, in a small Turkish fishing-boat, with two men in it, the person for whom such enquiries had been made, and they had landed him . H3 at
154 at Rhodes, from whence he sailed the next day for Joppa, Alphonsus rewarded the man liberally for his information, and then hastened to the merchant's, elated with what he had heard, and desired him to send and see if there was any vessel in the harbour bound for Joppa, as he was determined to follow his friend. This they strongly advised him against, as there had been seen hovering about the coast a large Barbary corsair, a circumstance very un* usual so high up in the Alediterranean. Besides, they were certain the old gen¬ tleman never continued long there, but went on to Jerusalem, or some place near it, and it would be next to im¬ possible to find him. They, therefore, begged him not to tbink of going, as it would be to no purpose whatever.— Those arguments had, at length, the de¬ sired effect, and he gave up his design. But, as he had nothing more to detain hini at Melasso," he the next morning took
Î? t УЭ
took leave of the merchant, and the friendly Turk, and returned to Smyrna, vvhere he hoped to find letters from Captain Brindley, He reached it with a heart divided between hone and fear ; his pulse b^a't high, as he approached the house. J W trembled to hear vvhat hc n:obt anxiou-lv wished to he informed of. With faltering voice and palpitating heart, he asked his ho*t, when he came out to receive him, W hether any ktters for him had arrived in his absence ? The man answered, None, but they vvere expected every hour. He added, that the Greek priest, that used to visit him, had been there several times, having something to impart to him, and had desired to be informed of his return.— Alphonsus ordered them to send, and accuiaint him with it. They did, and, in about an hour, he had the satisfaction of seeing him. This worthy man made a thousand enquiries after his heaith, and how he H 4 had
Ì5$ had left his companion. Alphonsus wa« at a loss what he should say respecting the latter. At length, he thought it best to keep, his flight secret ; he, therefore, satisfied him respecting all, as rar as was necessary, and changed the ci ¡¿course by asking after bis friend, the Greek mer¬ chant. 44 It was to give you the account of his health/' buid the priest, " and vvhat has happened in your absence, that I waited upon you. We have heard strange things ; but, thank God ! my good friend is now bettei, and I hope will soon be perfectly recovered. You know, when you went away, he was very dangerously ill, and it was some days after your departure, before I could enter¬ tain the least hope of his life ; and what aggravated the malady was, that he was continually imagining he saw young Morland by his bed-side, At last, after thirteen days struggle, I had the hap¬ piness to find the fever abate. But I found
157 found it impossible, even when he became sensible, to persuade him that the spectre did not still haunt him. This distressed me greatly, and I began to fear, that, though he had lost the fever, he might fall a sacrifice to his imagination. But, thank Godi a circumstance happened, which put an end to my fears. " I had been talking, one evening, with him very seriously on the folly of his supposing the ghost stiil came to him, as I was certain, if it did, I should have seen it. Scarcely had I said this, when, looking towards him to enforce my argu¬ ment, I observed the form of young Morland within a yard of my chair. I was alarmed ; my friend perceived my consternation, and asked What ailed me, as 1 had broke off my discourse so abruptly ? I made him no answer, but looked stedfastly at the spectre. When I had recovered myself a little, and found it still continued near me, I rose up, and said; * In the name of that God, who H 5 permits
158, permits thee to wander thus, I intreat thee to tell me the cause ; and, if it is in the power of man to ease thy soul» speak, and I wiU do it/ He answered not. I repeated iL At last, he turned towards my friend» and said : * Hear me, both of you-^But stet not, when I tell you, That you see before you a mur¬ derer—a fralriçide— one, whose name the world will abhm I But there are those % still living, more guilty than myself^* my brother, now in this place. He urged me to a deed, that has damned my soul for ever, and he is now about to reap the^ fruit of his consummate vílľany, unless you prevent it/ 44 4 How can we prevent it V said I* ** Is not Mr. Morland the master of his own actions?' 4 You can/ said he, * prevent it. Hear me; go to Edward M&nson, who resides near St. Polycarp^ tomb: he has the care of the English and Dutch burying-ground* Bid him point out the* place where my miserable remains
159 remains are faid. Get thé coffin opened, şnd, beneath them, you will find papers that my brother caused to be interred with me. They will tell you what you ought to do. Remit them, as they are directed, to England/ " Thus saying, he vanished. 44 We were both in the greatest con¬ sternation. We looked.round the room; in search of him, but he was gone.--* 4 Thank God F said my friend, * you have, at last, seen him. ľm oure Ym àê glad of it as though I had heard of the safe arrival of all that is consigned to me. Now it is to be hoped he will plague only you. Isn't he & frightrul ligure ì and yet to this abominable man I held out my hHid* when I saw him* first at the Custom-house. Lord help rae! if I had touched him, suirely I should have died/ " * You have nearly died as it 1 is/ . I ; * but I hope something Will now ione, to rid you of your troublesome H 6 visitor/
visitor/ * But, how,' said he, * are wè to do what he desires ? How can we go^ and dig upa dead body ì Lord help mei I shall die yet. Why the plague could not he have bid somebody of his own nation do it? What are we to do now, and what will the English Consul say to it ? He will think we are mad, or mean to put an affront upon him.' ' No matter for that,' answered I. * If death was to be the consequence, I will do it, and that directly ; and, as you are too ill to accompany me, I will go by myself. I will contrive means, somehow or other, to get the grave opened, but do not say a word tö your wife of what I am gone to do. If I find papers in the coffin, I shall conclude there is something in the appearance. If not, I shall think no more about it, but deal a little roughly with the distressing object, if I see it again/ 44 He endeavoured to persuade me not to go, but I persisted ; I cailed in his man
161 man to attend, and left him. In my way, I cast about in my mind for an excuse to get the grave opened, and, luckily, hit on one, which was to go to Nanson, and tell him an English friend of mine was dead, who had expressed a strong desire to be buried with young Morland, and that the grave must be opened imme¬ diately, for which I would pay hiin very handsomely. I found Nanson at home ; he agreed to my proposal ; a certain hour was fixed on, and I was to assist him, as I chose there should be no person but ourselves. " I staid with him till the thne came, and we set to work«—we removed all obstacles in about two hours. When we reached the coffin, I begged him to assist me in removing the cover of it, as I wished much to see in what state the body was. He did, and I saw it nearly consumed. However, I soon found what I came in search of; for, under the cushion on which the head was laid, I -% perceived
im perceived a large parcel of papers. I instanfly put my hand on them. * Bless me!' said I, * what is this? Here are papers : Τ will take them out/ The man was much surprised. * Let us see/ said Γ, * whether there are any more/ We searched, but found none. * This was- what 1 wanted/ said I. * I dreamt there were papers here that I ought to be made acquainted with : we will now ñü up the grave again, as it was for this purpose I got you to open it. I have no one to bury: it was only to see whether my dream would prove true or Mm** ** Ike man believed what I said, and assisted me to* cover the body. We pul? every things as we found it, and, having paid thei man well, Ь returned to my friend 1 . He^fóred with amazement, wheri he* saw me enter with the papers in my Hand. 1 sat down immediately to exa¬ mine them. Some of those which had İkin uppermost were much injured by damp.
damp. They were lettets, we supposed, by a few of the scraps which we could connect; and fhe first lines that we could properly read ran thus/' ** Here the Father took a paper from his pocket, and read : ** Before I left England, my el- 44 dest brother was engaged to a lady— " their affections were mutual. This la- <* dy was likewise admired by my other *' brother, but she gave the preference to 44 the elder. It was destined for us to 44 come to this placet to improve the for- 44 tune my father had left us. I was youngs *' and under the guidance of my brothers. 44 The eldest was the most kind¿— my ** other Ρ had been taught to fear and obey 44 in every thing. Some obstacle* which ** he purposely threw in the way, to 44 prevent our sailing together» occasion- 44 ed* my eldest brother and myself to ·* stay in England some short time after 44 him. 44 A few
164 " A few days before he left us, he came ** to my room—I was writing. He pre* ' ** tended to be very unwell. I offered to 44 get assistance, but he said, He would ** not have any, as his mind was more 44 hurtkhan his body. I urged him to let " me knpw what it was that so much dis- ** tressed him, and whether it was in my ** power to serve hira. He hesitated.— " At last, he said : Yes, it was in my ** power, but he did not know how to " trust me. I was much hurt at his want '* of confidence, and said, If he thought " so lightly of me, why did he tell me at *' all that he was unhappy ? He replied, 44 That he did not know what to do ; but 44 if I would swear, never to impart to ** any one what he should say to me, he ** would tell me the whole of his troubles. ** To prove that I would inviolably keep 44 it, I desired him to dictate the oath, 44 and I would swear it. When I had 44 said this, he drew a bible from his pock- " et, and dictated an oath that makes " Ш У
165
44 my soul shudder when I think of it.— t€ But I had gone too far to recede, and « I ------Oh! direful moment! swore, " by the tremendous name of God, and " by every thing sacred, never to reveal ** what he should impart to me, and " likewise .to comply with whatever he 44 .should require of me. " That done, he sat down, and began *' the discourse, by saying How much he ** envied his brother's happiness, in being fc the favorite of Miss Merchon, and 44 that he never should be at peace one " moment, if he could not prevail upon " her to discard his brother, and make u choice of him. He said, The thought " of living without her was worse than fl hell, aod he was certain, if his brother 44 was not in the way, there would be no ** obstacle to his happiness; and, ifl *' would undertake to do any one thing *' for him, there was nothing in the world " that I could desire, in his power to ob- «* tain for me, but I should have. 44 I was
166 44 I was amazed at his discourse, and 44 could not imagine how it could possibly " be in my power to serve him respecting 44 the lady -, I told him so. * You know * nothing** said he ·, * have I not told you * that my brother stands between me and 4 happiness; novv, is it not easy for you * to comprehend my meaning r* I told " him, Indeed I could not. * Then,' said * he, angrily, * I shall say no more ; buť 4 J фШ take care that you shall repent 4 it/ 44 Hb manner of speaking hurt me.— «* I knew my whole dependence, till I ** came of age, was on him and my other 44 broker. I begged him not to be of- '* fended with me, but teH me what he 44 wished me to do to serve him, and I * would do it« ť 'Tis well,' said he ; 4 remember ti^e oath you have just now 4 taken.' f I do,* said I, * and will, dur- f ing life, religiously abide by it/ 4 Then < I will tell yoii» 1 said he, softening his 4 voice. * You know the only obstacle 4 Miss
167 Miss Mercbon's father had to *my bro¬ ther's proposals was, that his fortune was not large enough ; but, if he would, for a few years, try the effect of com¬ merce, towards the improvement of it, he should have no objection, if he was successful, to give him his child. Now, if he being the eldest, and by some thou* sands richer thpn either of us, has been refused, what bave I to expect, who cannot make even so good an offer? But there is oae way by which all naat* ters may be settled, and both of u& be¬ come the better for it/ 4 How is that V I asked. * Easy enough/ ша he.—* You know J am to sail this week, and you and Charles are to follow. Now, as I cannot have an opportunity of do¬ ing myself what I propose» i diali» therefore, expect you to 4o it for вае. — The passage, you know, will not be a short one, and there is no doubt but in the course of it you may fin4 an op* 4 portunity
168 * poriuÉîty to help Charles over the ship's * side. You know what I mean.' " I started up. 44 4 Nay, no starting/ said he ; * you * have sworn, and I shall expect you to * perform it. There shall be no hesitating « now—your life» or Charles's, I will * have; therefore, make your choice ; * you can easily do as 1 shall point out, * without the least fear of a discovery.— * That done, you shall have half his * fortune, and you make me your friend * for ever/ fC I Was wholly unable to speak, so *' much had the damned scheme surprised €f me. He saw the conflict in my breast, ** and reassumed his former harshness.— * I expect you not to hesitate/ said he ; * you remember what I just now said— « either yours, or his/ * Be it so, then,* € said I.—* I set but small value on my < own life, as it is of very little conse- * quence in the world, but my brother's * is/
169 * is/ He flew into a passion, threaten- " ed to accuse me of attempting to take ** his life, and said He was not at a loss ** for witnesses to support his accusatiom 44 He called to mmd the purport of my 44 oath, and that eternal damnation await- 44 ed me if I did not fulfil it. In short, 44 for some hours, he plied me with argu- " ments in every shape, and held out, at " last, such flattering prospects to me by " the acquisition ôf that half of my bro- *' ther's fortune vvhich would come to 44 me by his death, that he at length * f brought me to his purpose. 44 That done, he proposed that, when " we got into the Bay of Biscay, where " the sea generally rolls very high, I ** should one night prevail upon Charles 44 to drink much, and, when heated with 44 wine, under some pretence or other, go 44 upon deck, and get him to follow ; I ** should then watch an opportunity, when 44 the ship heeled much, to give him a 44 shove, and send him headlong over the 44 side
ïio 44 side of the vessel This agreed up- **" oo, we parted, after he had exacted ** a astili more solemn oirth that I would * fulflt my engagements. He sailed " three days after, and we were to follow " in six weeks. 44 We did; but from that dreadful day 44 I have never known a single ray of com- 44 fort. 1 did not suffer my thoughts to " dwell upon the crime for a moment; ** I dared not think of any thing but the 44 pleasures I should enjoy, when put into 44 possession of so many thousands more 44 than I had reason to expect. Still, at " times, my conscience would up- * f braid me for complying with his infer- *' nal proposal î but ï soon stifled that in 44 the bottle. 44 In this manner \ passed the time tiil 4€ we sailed. 1 thought, when we entered 44 the Bay, of doing it immediately; but, 44 whenever ľ was set in my mind to ex- '* ecute it; I felt I know not what to 44 check mf, and We quitted the Bay " without
171 4( without my accomplishing my design. «' I could not help at times rejoicing in it, 44 and as often as I looked at my brother, ** I thought his honest soul reproached cr me for harbouring an intention so base. ť * 1 was therefore determined to tell my 44 brother John, That I found it impossi· 44 Ые ; but, if my life would do as an <f atonement for preserving Charles's, he 44 bhould be at liberty to take it. Would " to tbe Eternal God I had continued in " those resolutions I Then should I have " lived in peace, and died in hope. But 44 novv all is fled ; there is neither peace " here, nor hope hereafter. All, all, is damn· " ing black despair. Could I recall that 44 dreadful moment, how welcome would *' be the approach of death ! But now—» 44 oh, hell ! hell I I already anticipate 44 the torments of the damned. Cain ; s " image is ever before me, and I hear* 44 Hke him, a brother's blood crying for 44 vengeance against meg|Qh ! tliat I could 44 bide me from all j that.the sea would ** open
172 *' opçn its rolling waves to receive me, ** and bury me in the deep for ever! ·* But th|t cannot be. No, I feeľ it here 44 —the vital spirit informs me I shali ** never die. Oh, horror ! horror ! but for ** a brother's cruelty, I had never been a ** brother's murderer^ ------ But I must pro- ** ceed. €t y/ç g 0 ^ n early to the end" of our ** voyage, and I secretly rejoiced thai; I 44 had not completed the diabolical task ** assigned me ; but, alas ! I knew not 44 the wickedness of human nature—I * f was doomed to be a fratricide. ** While I was pleasing myself with the 44 thought of being still worthy of the 44 name of a brother, a violent storm 44 arose, and drove the vessel greatly out 44 of her course. She sprung a leak, and, 44 notwithstanding every effort, the sea- * men found it difficult to keep the wa- 44 ter under, and they were obliged to *< be continuais ayt the pumps. The ** passengers were, at last, compelled to 44 assist
1ТЗ í 44 assist at them, and, among ^the rest, 44 Charles md myself. Unhappy m> 44 menti 44 We were summoned, and went on ** deck. Then it was the completion of ** my oath rushed, like a whirlwind; on ** my mind, and, as if beset by all the spirits 44 of the damned, I found myself deter- 44 mined to accomplish it, as I seemed ful- ** ly persuaded the storm was sent on pur- " pose. Full of this idea, I seized the 44 moment when the vessel shipped a sea, 44 to plunge my brother into a watery ** grave 1!! 44 Oh, damning moment of hellish poli- *< cy î —Every one was too busy to attend 94 to any man in particular, and I had, as I *' vainly thought, the satisfaction of 44 knowing I was observed by no human 44 eye. But He that watches with un- 44 remitting attention the actions of all 44 men, saw and recorded mine. Yes, *< the all-seeing eye of God beheld it, 44 and, before I reached the port, I was Voi. II. I « convinced
m f* corrvincçéj had purchased an infinity 44 mi tormenta. Several times E w^s^on « the point of plunging headlong into 44 the waves, and seeking the same wind- ** iog ahçet that bwa enwrapt him, whose ff 4iftri ought, mt Ле risk of îmy ow#, to chipte preserved. When the other pas- 44 jrøagtÉ» and ship's crew condoled with ** me on the loss I had sustained, it v pointed dagger to my heart, and, in ** a 3tate littje short of madness, I was **> landed at this piace. 44 My countenance plainly indicated 44 to my brother that I had but too sue- *« lustfully ejfecutedrhis commission, and, ** while my soul was torn by ten thou- * #and Varying pangs, he was exulting i* inf the success of his damnable machi- ** nations. He laughed at me, when ** alone, for niy folly, and said I did not *' deserve Ю possess wealth, smce İ knew 44 net how to enjoy ii* He put on mourn- ** irig^But hksoul was a stranger to grief, * while ф{де waa ràéked with the > * * 4t keenest
По 44 keenest anguish. What would I not * 4 most readily have givétí, fo hive ťeštoť- ** éá mf murdered Chalíes i Htíw inaný « different deaths woürM I nbt gtødfy 44 have died, to have called hini baëk to <c life, and to have again beheld him as I ** was wont to do ? 44 For several months, I have dragged 44 on an existence more dreadful than thé 44 most accumulated tortures, and, to ease 4f my mind of soute part of its heavy " load, I sit down to impart a short ac- rC count of my crimes to you, you that 44 knew me, when peace resided in my " bosom, and when guilt was a stranger ** to it. If you can dare to pity a wretch 44 like me, whose hated life is prolonged, ** that I may feel keener the pangs of tf bitter remorse, then feel for mè; if á 44 murderer, a brother's murderer, can 44 claim your pity. I am sinking to that " grave, to which, had I been conveyed <( before that fetal moment, when I seal- « ed my final doom, y ou, and all that loved I ž « my
116 ■■ψ my :;t|Hire^ts>· might have rejoiced over # rim* Ifot now; you will curse me— .^yø^j^^'^ou will curse me! But, V;?.^. л.З^^М^-^Л^^* : " ''•íí 3 t°e only consolation I ^ GOiteMiss Merchon ; read my con- tf fession to her; let not her innocent * soul be deceived. I know the letters .-?* my brother has received from Mr. Mer- <á chop; he has given bim leave to ad- 44 dress his daughter. Ah í let her not ** take to her bosom the man that could c * plot the destruction ofhis brother, who ** never offended him, but loved him *f with the greatest tenderness, and ever ** studied his temporal and eternal wel- " fare. 'Tis the only retribution I can fl make—the only thing I can do, to "atone for my crimes-——a pooratone- ** ment, the righteous will say, for sins 44 like thine. Think not, that, by such f* an act, thou wilt in any shape gain a 44 remittance of thy punishment. No, " my friend ! No, I do not hope it. I ■ ■ . л ** know
ni * 44 know my doom, and will patiently 44 submit to it; StiU I will implore your 44 pity, I will beg it on my knees—-—then ** let me, oh 1 my friend, let my request 44 be granted. When you receive this, ** I shall be no more. I feel tbe icy *' hand of death grasp tight my tortur- " ed heart—I feel his chilling touch— í 44 shrink from his embrace—and yet, I " court him. Oh í that he could hide 44 me from myself î Oh ! that, in his last *' sad gripe, some ministering angel of 44 pity would whisper peace to my dis- 44 tracted soul í Ah ! then, with what 44 transport would this struggling spirit, 44 that now shrinks from every touch, ** and starts back apalled, hapten to meet '* the dart ! But that, my friend, is not ·* the case with me. I feel all the tor- " ments of the damned, without the ** smallest ray of comfort, without one 44 single gleam of hope——Oh! save ·' riie—hide me, ye pales of darkness? " coyer me, ye clouds, with your shel- I S " tering
m your certains, 1¿#¡)|^^^ Wretched 'I |ЬЭД|||% Mßr carrying me—all hell is ^ЗЙаЙОЮЙ/ЗагАС-Л. ^^i1N^.=-i^P*oaacïDt;.- of direful ■%k^^M:i^ip passed, and I дт a lit^ 44 tha collected. I will once more attempt f* to .|öl> you what I wish you to per- 44 form* ■,.\#.;ХуЩ1р&%-аштеа : уои to see Miss ЩгеЬо^;1а^, rny crimes before her, ^ ^nd let bm faiher know %Ъ$ c|iatacter %#ffbJ№iWl}<*m ЬъЪщ destined ţo be the ik husband of his child. Ah I let nofc "Ihtr spntl§ss h^irt fee united to him, ^ th#t ço^Jd urgf a brother to a brothers <? iri^rder ! Ы not the life of one, and ci : ţh% f terpal danţnatipn of фе other, be *tţhei price hy whkh she is obtained ! 'ţifcet щ% the diabolical being revel in ' 4 % $iß possession of ţbpse chşrmş, that 44 baye been purchased at so high aerate I * 4 ΐΤΦ thend what I have dpne?iwTelI > f her
<«
r$5 44 ber what I fetl-^The» bid her fly him 44 for as tbe east is fţoşi $m . fmfttor 44 fromtheextremity ofpole to pole. Let " ber fty, rathør than unke herself to sf> 44 damned a villain Hi 44 Many days have I spent in writings ** this ------ 1 cannot long hotd the pea at 44 at a time——I am watched—yes, my " friend, 1 am guarded by him that sold ** my soul. His suspicious heart thinks 44 that 1 shall betray him, notwifhstand- 44 ing my oath. No, I will not, while I 44 draw the breath of life ; but, when 44 this agonised pulse shall cease to bear, 44 then, if I can rely on the slave whø 44 has procured me the means of writing, 44 you shall be informed. Then* you 44 will receive this, and, if the preyerà ** and entreaties of him you once called ** your friend, can have any weight with 44 you, then may I hope yau will com- " ply with my request, and save from mi- 44 sery another destined victim. 14 44 Farewell I
IBO 44 Farewell! tmi Farewell for ever f 44 Práy for üÜJcyï implore you ; I entreat ** you, pţay for me. Your prayers will ** ascend to the throne of Heaven—mine 44 cannot.—No, I am murderer*—a frátri* 44 elde. Oh ! horrid, horrid thought ! ------ " Farewell ! again, Farewell ľ' V This, Şir," said the Father, " is the copy of what I found. Some more had· been written, but the wet had so disco¬ lored iţ, that it could not be made out. As soon as we had read it, I searched for the name of the person to whom, it was directed, but, unfortunately, the damp had erased it. What to do, I knew not. fo comply with the earnest desire of the dead, was what I was determined on. We cast about in our minds how to find out who the person was for whom it was designed. At length, my friend hit on one that seemed feasible, which was, to let one of his slaves go to the English Consul, and enquire YVhether he knew any
ısı any particular friend of young Morland, to whom he used to direct. This appear¬ ed to me the most likely, and I resolved to go myself.
CHAP.
ш
Full many a gem of purest ray serene, The dark unfathom'd caves of Ocean bear ; Full many a flower is born to blush unseen, Ana waste its sweetness on tht desert air. GtAY. " I LEFT my friend, and hast¬ ened to the Consul's, but they were all in hed —I had forgot it was the middle ofthe night. Г, returned, and informed him of it ; he then advised me to go to rest Kkewise, and visit him early in the morning. We, therefore, went to bed, but I slept not : nothing but Miss Mer¬ chon, and the miserable Morland, was before my eyes. I longed for morning, being impatient to complete what I had begun. At length, it came, and as soon as I thought I might see the Consul, I hastened there. r> , . "He
ISS " He was not up ; but, fortunately, I met one of the writers: to him I made known ray business, statiof tbat some ^ery private reasons obliged me to have recourse to him for that information I might have obtained from John Morland. He very readily consented to examine the books, and shortly found t That young Morland had sent ktters by them,, direct¬ ed to a Mr.Grenough* Old Broad Street, London. This gentlerşan, he said, he was« certain had been, when he was in England, his very particular friend,, aad to him. he had twice written, a short time before his death. I, therefore^ concluded this must be the person,, and, aftet thank¬ ing tlie writer for his poJutenes% hastened back to ray friend. 44 Ια my absence, he had again looked over the manuscript, aad fancied he had made out the direction of one of the letters ; and, fortunately, upon comparing it with that I ha# received, we found it to be the same, thougli, without that help, I б we
184 we could not so readily have done it, the name of the street only bemg visible. Tf hen sat down, and began to copy the writing. Towards afternoon 1 had com¬ pleted it. I took an account of ail the scraps where the least writing was to be seen. I then set about giving a full account of the manner in which I had discovered them, and desired he would not fail to comply with the request con¬ tained in it, as I hoped it wouid reach him time enough to complete the wishes of the dead. 44 It was rather late the next day before I had finished it. When I had done, I put it up in a packet, and then I was at a loss how I could get it sent off immediately. At last, I thought I would go again to the Consul's, and advise with the gentleman I had seen the day before. I did, and he very kindly offered to get it conveyed, in the most expeditious manner, agreeably to the direction. I returned ţo my friend, who was miserable, when-
185 whenever I left him ; for, he was always under an apprehension of again seeing young Morland, and the very idea of it would make him sťart from'the chair; but, after a great deal of talking, I have convinced him he has nothing to fear.—- He is now mending fast, and will soon be able to go abroad. " The circumstance that occasioned his illness has found its way about the city, and has been much talked of. John Morland is so much affected at it, that he is gone to one of the Consul's houses, at Sedequi, to avoid hearing any thing тэге about İt, and it is reported that Yessam and he have quarrelled, that the firm is to be dissolved, and Morland is about to return to Europe; but, thank Heaven ! I am beforehand with htm there, as I had the good fortune to have my packet sent off to Mr. Grenough, three days after I had taken it to the Consul's. This account I thought would amuse
ist аганяе you, and my friend was anxious io have you informed of it." Alphonsus was exceedingly obliged by the attention of the Father, and the confidence he reposed in hún; for,no one ebe had been informed of ihe tran¬ saction. The good man desired he would call and see bis friend» as he had not yet bft his room« This Alphonsus promised, and tbey parted. After the Faiher had left him, the thotights of Alphonsus again became a chaos. He dwelt on, his sorrows, and conjured up a thousand distressing cir- cumstAftces to ? aggravate them. Thus passed the time, titt the hour whea he ¿ad pr€tíotósed to wait oa the merchant Ife went, and was received by himt wkh Ifae merit coudial welcome, " I am re~ jiititdfe" wd he, " beyond measure to s^e you. OW bow 1 wished you, had bffn^ Ыге, tø he^ шу good Father;, for he has hade«ug¿todo afong with, thai jfcbominable ghost of young Morland ; for,
Ϊβ7 for, ifi turned out t*> be aH tratíi^ anď there? has befe», за ţ*re all suspected* murder among thcøa* No wonder one could nctè sleep in his graves and the Qtbçr in \щ bed* Lord bless us 1 what a world this is ί that two men. should ber such fools *s to fall in love with omes worn*», when there are so тшу for a man tp» have» that! is disposed to get married, without killing one asother, anct such noosçn&e* Lord help usi! I saw my iîepbany, liked* her, made* love to ber> and married her, without any such lue» as the Em^fehaa^n make. Why, one would Шиж that men betonging to soi gceat a nation c*4ikl not be sujch nod- 44 Sfa shoujd I," »aid Alpbonswri «* bu* Aere iş рас obsen^ipn 1 1 hav« heard Captain Brindky №&Q> .Thnt tint more enlivened * ?ßo§ks> a^e, %\щ møre prone they are, tp sadness» wWichaefîo«nt%îıt some «^asw^ for the mafly diefcx^cal ъфт, we find cQBiaaiOed l^y жешь.— The
188 The English are more liable to it, I think, than any other nation in Europe. Their education, their climate, their mode of thinking and acting, all contribute to aggravate the malady. Almost the first principle a young man is taught in that country is, That, in love and war, alt stratagems are lawful. Their religious pursuits are but lightly attended to, and, so they keep up a small outward show of respect toward the establised forms, they are satisfied. Domestic comforts, with a wife and children, mey are abso¬ lute strangers to f unless one here and there. Ibe man who were to presume to spend his evenings at home, would be pointed at as a milksop, totally under the government of, his wife ; a species of reproach, that, even the peasants, are ashamed of. Thus, thé men hurry into various companies, and that not seldom' widi women of the most abandoned character, which must unavoidably lead them among those that neither possess honor
im honor nor honesty 5 and it is not ün~ frequent, I have been told, for men in, that country to boast ofthe possession of a woman, whom he knows but from report, in order to aggravate another, who, perhaps, entertains a sincere passion for her. The ladies likewise imbibe the same principles, and, whether singles married, all aim at rivaling each other* and so persevering are they in this pur* suit, that it is common to find a very plain woman the successful rival· of à young and blooming beauty. Accom¬ plishments, in the ladies, are but veiy little regarded by the gentlemens fbr¿ though they grant the females every &н dulgence, in regard to literary pursuits, yet they view a sensible woman inthe light of a rival, obscure merit is wholly? disregarded, and* if a man or woman possess the most brilliant talents, unless» they can make friends witb a great mail's favorite, and, by that means, get Recom¬ mended to notjce, they arg , suffered to languish
tm languish ih obscurity, and their treat acquirements are huf ted with them: not \mb Ishave Ыаг4 Capt. Brindley say» That, When a« genius h known to the world, none ia more ready than the feig* lish to promote them; hut the grand difficulty is for people of merit to make themselves known, as that diffidence which ever accompanies true genius is a constant bar to their being known. ■vt¥,*A1I in that country sigh for indepen¬ dence,-and the only stimulus that excites thetn td labor* is the hope that they shall» by iome years of continued industry, attain Ae desired end. They are na- turally indolent, but the desire they havo to rival each other, whether in war, love, merchandize, or otherwise, forces them to «»rt those powers Nature has so liberally bestowed upon them ; and, father than his neighbour shall marry a girl with a tarf ár fortune thetí Ытве!£ he will unit© himself tö Ц**, ignorance, and eğluıe^i and I havii heard that mother*
m will persuada their daughters to marry a man these times their age, though bis character should be the most abandoned· So they are settled» as they term it, hap» piness is never thought of. Hence, you hear of so many divorces among them» The man, when once in possession of the woman he is desirous to obtain, instead of seeking domestic happiness, which is фе pnly bond to secure felicity, thinks no more about her than of a piece of his household furniture. If he wants an heir to his estate, and that blessing is nib* tained, no mpre iş necessary: he quite his wife, and oies for amusement to the arms of a prostitute. The wife, finding heţself neglected, цеек$ among the gay and vain those attentions denied her by her husband. When eaeh is criminal, their conduct becomes notorious, and they деек redrew in bw. This would, I am certain, have beea the ease/: had Morland become the husband -of thé, young Ыу, for whom he haa sacrificed twe*
Î92 two brothers, and, without doubt, his" owrr soul. Therefore, wbat you have dòtte tò prevent her misfortunes, has been* the immediate interposition of Heavenf; and plainly demonstrates that the Al¬ mighty regards every one's actions with the most sedulous attention ; not the minutest are hid from his all*searching eye. You will not, I am persuaded, see this unfortunate young man again. ï call him unfortunate ; for, I think he was 1 more weak than wicked; for a truly bad man feels no remorse, let his actions be what % they may ; but he seems to have felt the sharpest compunction for his crime, and, if he could have restored his murdered brother* he would Шге been happy.'* They had a much longer discourse upon the manners of the English, whkh ended in aie merchant saying, He should always like that nation for the sake of ihat wor¬ thy man Captain Brindley. Alphonsus thanked himfor the good opinion he er> 4 * * tertained
193 tertained of his friend— it pleased him rnnch. He continued with the merchant and the Father for many hours, prombed to visit thefo often, and during three weeks that passed in anxious expectation of letters, he spent much of his time there. His mind was dead to curiosity ; therefore he sought not to amuse himself in exploring the ruins in and near Smyrna. The only pleasure he found was in going to the harbour, and watching every ves¬ sel that came in or went out. In this pursuit he had spent several days, and had for the last four observed a lad, about twelve years old, sitting un¬ der a projecting part of the rock that overhung the shore. He seemed very ear¬ nestly engaged over something that he held in his hand, so that he passed him several times on each day, without his observing him. Alphonsus remarked that he never came there till nearly the time for shutting the shops, and when he was certain there would be fewest people near
m near the spot. He Was in the English dreist, and appeared fo be above the rank of a cabin boy. Alphonsus had therefore the curiosity to watch him; the youth % back was toWard tfie sea, and, as he drew near, he heard him exclaim, ** Ay, that will do ; now f have it." He then wrote something on á piece of paper with great quickness, then paused a Kttle, and wrote again—by his side were two small books. Alphonsus did not attempt to disturb Mm, but stood at a small distance, ob¬ serving the lad's diflerent motions. One minute he would Ье very serious, the next very gay 5 then appear vexed, as if he could nőt accomplish something tbat he wished 4 . In this manner be had spent above half an hour, when some sailors canté near the spot with a large dog, which they sent into the water; Une of them spying the Ы, called out ; "Hanbo, Dick, are you there again ? As sure as a gun, youTt get flogged.* Thé youth made
19 J made no answer, but hastily put up what he had been writing, placed it in his bosom, and seemed much vexed at the intrusion. Alphonsus advanced to him, and asked Whether the man who spoke was any re¬ lation to him ? " Yes, Sir," said he 4t he is my unck." " Do you reside here ?" spiked Alphonsus. 44 No, Sir ; that is røy father's ship, painted yellow, along-side the Venetian and Dutchman/' *· Then he trades here?" said Alphonsus. ·« Yes," returned the youth ; ° he is just arrived from Scanderoon; we touched here to take in some cotton and raw grøt«"·— - 44 What is your father's name r" ** Berry/* said the boy. ** We are English, and be* long to Liverpool/' ** You seera fond of reading," said Alphonsus j " does not your father encourage you in it ?" ff No, Sir/' said the sweet boy, hi a plaintive accent ; tff my father don't bve much read¬ ing ; he thinks it makes boys etoptd."— ** What book* are you fona of ? I think I can
196 can lend you some, while you are here, and í will ask your father's permission for you to read them." ** Will you, Sir?" cried the youth, and joy sparkled in his eyes. *' The» vou will be kind indeed ; for I have but three or four books, and they are very small ; but I love poetry best,"— ** Have you not a book with you now ?" said Alphonsus.—" Yes, Sir ; here it is ; a very small one; it contains fables in prose and verse, and some short tales/' Alphonsus, when he had turned it over, said; "It is small indeed, but, I believe, very entertaining."— 4t Yes, Sir, they are entertaining; but I have read them so often, because I had no other, that I can almost say the whole of them out of book/' *' But you write, too," said Al¬ phonsus ; " were you copying any of those fables ?"— * 4 No, Sir, I was trying to turn one of the stories into verse."— 44 And have you done it ?" " Yes, Sir ;" returned the youth. u Will you oblige me with a sight of it?" said Alphonsus. 44 1 am
44 1 am ashamed," said the boy, « to let you see it ; it is done so ill ; for I don't know much about verse, only I love to try what I can do," € * That is very lau¬ dable, and, if you will favor me with a sight of it, I hope I may have it in my power to furnish you with materials tô write better." The youth's intelligent face beamed with pleasure at this assurance. He took the papers from his bosom j there were several sheets of them. * f Now, Sir," said he, ' s when you have read them, I hope you will not laugh at them, nor let any body know what they aré ; only tell me where I am wrong ; for, my father would be very angry at me, if he knew I spent my time in writing such foolish things ; and, as you will not be able to read thera before 'tis dark* you can take them home; I can see you to-morrow here again ; and, if you will have the goodness to lend me a book, I shall be very much obliged to you, and I will
ψ$^^ρ&* you fút îr. I know whore- yojuJive,i$ f m nlrí^reet ; I s^w you g^ in yesterday A *M3o you.? 11 said Alphon¬ sus j u tbßn come witb me now, and what few books I have y ou dţall bç welcome tø/ 1 Saying, this, he took the lad by the arm, and they went home together. His library was buttery small, as it only con- silted ofa few English books, which the Captain had leit for his amusement, ia order to perfect him in that language. ifowever* there happened to be five volumes »of Shakespeare Plays ; one of tìmm hf gaye the youth, and desired him to read it wuth.attentiojau This.he faith· f|illy : ţgomîmd* ше seemed tpâte happy, Alphonsus jkejpkJttfflf ¿hero. w loog as he couldstay,and promised to meethim npon ^^fhoreithenextday* The lad thanked fcPiW^m» and went away y as happyas if btbiibeen made s^verej^njof a .mighty, kingdom. When
w* When, be war gone^ АйрЪешигтв* ipretted mueh tìiat he <ftirnot! temáetň bmyrťia : he haľé taten- «? vail Kkingf to the you% rod thought of ttteplëasm^ he should ehjoyiahearihg· sueh atî intel* Jigentîadl read Wìnm, ща, aťtfce saıA4 time, hef should gain 1 improvement^!!! tík English, a language he was апхШ15 to obtain. He pleaded himself withr thi thought of daily con versing with hirø; and pointing out those beauties in*· thé books which Captain ВппиЧеу had mark¬ ed for him. He took them^all down^aUd, with an avidity that the mind ill aleasø always adopts, wheii ît wjshes to пуШщ itseif, he turned them over, and read some of the marked passages; but found his ideas too much occupied wiflt ttotibje, to reflect on any of them» He rrøtaced the books, and attempted to write, but was alike unsuccessful, fle traversed the room for somfe^tînté ţ th%n^ suäťfeply recollecting himself, took o«t the ybuth's poetry. It was written in a very pretty К 2 hand,
4Ô0 hand, and, bating some errors, did not appear altog^iher unpleasing. It was styled M The tburtiér cured юг Ambi¬ tion r and there was another little piece, not quite jfinished, entìtìed " Stanzas to a Ely*" and written with pencil; it was llusfce waseAgaged on, when the sailor interrupted hkn. That respecting the Courtier pleased Alphonsus, and he found amusement in reading it, as fol- клшьа ***** '«Lí'f ^ ŕ J Darkness liad âr&m iu săut veil „ £$& half the 'movbg glohe, w AjldMoiq^îetts sweet, with velvet shod» ϋ$ muk .with sleep erırobç. ч AjÄ ^ecereip^d around ; . Ко bird but owl was heard or sees 'pa .'t' | J * A * Amid thè vast profound. ,t,- / * -*. \ . t , . . > ' Ι, ΈλΦ щЩ щ^рлуг^щЬш^ of pwy ^ %m f asm ъ)$Ьщ Щ Φ» j ; tioŕ píowľd агошк! m wareb of foo4 NoríOüght the ЬашивоГюед. . . Whüe
UÙl While Hodge, Within his humble cot, Did sleep securely there, Nor dreamt of Losing friend or placet With agitating fear** . Upon a soft and downy bed A revtless courtier lay, Reflecting on each past evenr, Before the verge of day. Ful! of't he tAirn'd him tò and fro, With anxious grief and'care ; Thus to himself lamenting spoKe,- In accents of despair. " Ah ! why did fortune, fickle dame, Give me such store of wealth ? And not send happiness with it, Nor calm content, nor health ? ** What good my titles lofty sound, Or all my gold to me; If peace of mind is me denied And I must wretcheďbeF^ Repining, thus he mourn M hts fari, When, loî a form appear'd, And thus, in accents sweetly miW, Ån angel voice he heard.
*»
M Azael,
J* Aasael, %^ед^ touch'd RpJMAi. Thy cares ľd fain ящщге* But, while- Ansion АШ$ф 5<#J* Abı! what a\aUs my Ιοχβ> * Would'st thou &ν}$φ$ψο#$βΐφ w" iì|fl4* A calm and easy life ? Renounce the b\t wf riches great And honor's hated $rjjÇt/* tt Alas !" the Щ}/ф*ояф№.йащЫ ** I would, with all myjhean·, ' For happiness, from all my m¡tét&> And all my honors part»** « L«ave,thf|,rţl^j^r^ # ^4^||ftii^ ** And go, føtø» daysVipcf, Along the road th#i ţrftşhelti W· b T ô matter wlţaMJief^ee. " A discontent} ^aji«will &*ty A ¿seful sight to thee^ To cure thee oí Kpjí^g ţho^tş And· set thy spirits føt?. «* After the twj> ^ аге*Ы^, Back the same w^y j»tu|P, And know that fc№p*wş 4epftö& Upon thyself alone/*
sos Thus said, the Angel disappeared, Azael his pillow prest ; Yet, ere bright Phoebus beaming roes» He left his balmy rest. He traveliM on with hasty steps, Expecting what he sought ; But none appear'd to ease his mind, . Or calm Hie troubled thought* He wish'd to stop; but'knewnot where f^ No house, no friend was nigh—« Despairing, resting oil his staff, A peasant met Ыз ûjs* With joy he view'd aie humble maa, And quickly him addrest, To say How near a viUage was, Where hemight atop to rest. *< Ten miles,** replied the lowly mau^ " The road's by no means clear t But» if my cottage you/ü accept, You shall be welcome thetW. With joy the offer he accepts, And gladly entera b, Beneath the poor and humble roof' Where dwelt nor wealth, aor tinv
£ 4
Wé The peasant spteads. hk bumble boards With all his little store ţ And, while he prest his guest to eat, Lamented 'twas no more. " How hlest are you,'* Ãzael said, ** Within this humble cot 1 All misery is banish'd hence ; How different 'm my lot I " A noble palace I possess. Thousands I can command ţ Bat riches never with content Ha?e yet gone hand in hand.** ~~« Now yon talk of palace** To-morrow, I shall take A journey tothe city fair, Some pleasure to partake*" —** Why will you run so great a risk, To lose ц*е bliss уои*?е got Ì When palaces you, haye survey 'd, You'U then despis« your col ** At present,'tis a court to you ; It crowns you with content» Forego those thoughts» I do you beg ţ Fox sorely yotfü repent·"
~.« What·***
2СЙ£ —« Whate*er yon Шу wfll not avail f I've heard such various things \ Of palaces, aU deck*d with gold, Fit residence forfang*"* Azael with pity heard bis bost, ■ Determin'd to pursue The path which led to misery, Tho* pleasmg to ibe view. Next morn, they rose at early dawn ; Each took a different way; But promis'd first to meet again, Before the close of day. Azael, pondering, took a ψ*νά* í That led across tlie plain* · FuU many a weary step he took. Bat took each step in'vain. As night approach'd, he turn'd him back*,. And sought the peasant's cot} When at the door his host be views,« · Repining at his lot. He starts, be stops, be views bis face,. And marks the silent tear, That down: his cheeks in torrents ran,, As if in deep despair. -
к 5
44 Aht dtvrtbi^'' kvçntút m What have I dt^ цр|о ü> Qodi^ That wealth is шг ащщ$$ 9 Ше that Azael an anwwar gave» An angel-forro, array'd In radiant brightjsess, nea# the» floods And this with mildnes« wét " Uthoa hadfet Itøtfabo Aaaal, And follow'd hi* «dilue, ч Thou ne'er had'&t hee» what now thoa art-· A slare to avarie*. " Moderate thy vain A^rts j Resorne thy natt? е сай ι Then happmess tim wik rçgaùi, Ere thou has't lost it «lh n —" Ip vain yoti tpeabt ia nio I hear i ifetlmyVretchcdiate, And I unhappy ehaH геллш, Till Godshall change шу state." —* Could'st thott enjoy thy every wisb> How curs'd would be tby doom i Then mk the peace that rotmd^thee waftf, Nor farther bpgto гоащЛ
•«Talk
βΟΊ —" Talk od/' replied the fisherman î «* 'Twill neter hinder ще, b sighing íbr another state, 1 can't more wretched be." ~~'« God, in his anger, often grants What man aspires to gain; Which, when enjoyM, too late he ßnd» 'Tis bought with grief and pain. * Bat, since nor love, nor reason strong, Can o*er thy mind prevail, Three things to thee thy God will grant i- Ask them—he will not fail." With rapture sparkling in his eye$, r He beg'd to have adorn'd A noble palace, 'stead of cot, Which instant was performer The nest, His pretty purling stream » He'd have changed to a sea. The ocean wide-, a pleasing scene î Dkl look so fair and gay. The last, Hb Uttle fishing-boat,* Io which hé took delight, Must to a gallant ship bè tum'd, Laden with diamonds bright· ■
К 6
"Ей all accompUih'd ^ hit wisK^ Abeard he'd *tnúgr¿ repair, To view hia todteia riches greit, Which seem'd embosom'd thet&. If е -te no sooner got on board, Than howling winds arise, That phmge Шз ship to Ocean** bed; Or lift it to the skies. In tain he strives to gab the land ; The billows round him roai ; The gaping ocean opens wide ; - He sinks—to rise no more! ' Azael samy'd the awful scene ; Conviction filľd his breast ; When thus, in accents sweetly mild, TheA^btaaddrcst: « Be wise, and learn from this man's ja Щ To let Ambition cease. Seek oot some loyMretirement; h potna thepath to peace, « Te not in crowds, or gilded domes, That tbou most hope to snd The bliss^pf sweet content, or health, But la ivtteouiniini*!
шт
—. <* Tfiy blest advke,sweÄ montei, I will this moment take ι And all that held my soul a slave With joy from hence forsake. w The many thousands I*re атаз$\|\ Shall serve to sooth distress ; And all my fatare life shall he Spent here in thankfulness.'* The reading of this little tale amused· Alphonsus for many hours, and he sin¬ cerely lamented that he was not an adept in the English, language to correct its er¬ rors. There was something in the youth's pitching upon that particular tale to ver¬ sify, that pleased him exceedingly, and he* was determined to go- to his father the- next morning-, and request him to* permití the lad to be with him as much as possible,. while he stayed at Smyrna. He was« vexed at the interruption he had met with,. when writing the stanzas to a Butterfly,. as there was not the least doubt, but he would
would fiave finished it, hid not die rude¬ ness of the sailor prevented hint, To the Butterfly* Fluttering trembler, take thy Mght ; Mount aloft in yielding зт Here in bondage I'll not keep thee» Fly to some indulgent fair. Oa her panting bosom lay thee, Underneath tne shady gaaze r Sóli concealing, beaude« fcreening. There then take ·**##♦ The oftener Alphonsus read this, the more he was texed at its not being finish** ed. ** I will ¡p? said he, 44 to his father* iwill intreat to have this sweet boy for щу companion. He wili write, he will mad, he will sooth my sorrows. Surely, be will aot deny \ш* Such, a few years hence, wül be шу sweet Carlos ----- my> 3w%et СайожГ did I say ? No, he is torn from me for, ever· Torn 1 Oh í mercy, Heaven i
mt Heaven ! spare me that horrid thought* Oh ï Alzira ! my lost Alzira !♦...." AH his sufleríngs, at saying this, passed* in quick succession beforr hinv and the night rolled oa in misery.
\
CHAP.
*u%
СЯАР. IX. News from Verona ! How now Ψ Dost thou not bring me letters trom the Friar ? Romeo and Juuet. WHEN his breakfast was brought, in the morning, he endeavoured to hide from his attendant the anguish of his mind, and asked, as- usual, Whether there was any vessel arrived from Lisbon? The man said^None. " I shall go to the Custom-house,? said Alphonsus, " andL wait there for a few hours." But, presently,, he changed his mind,, and went to the shore, determining,, as soon as he was a little more composed, ţo go to Captain Berry, and request the company of his son* But, when he had passed the Bezestein, he had the satisfac¬ tion of seeing the youth sitting, reading, on. the spot where he saw him the day before, * . - He
an Hehastened up to him. The boy had Shake* spear in his hand, and was so much taken with what he was reading, that he never observed Alphonsus, who stood for some time looking at him, till the youth came to a scene, between Corin and Touchstone, in " As you like it." One of Shakespear's merry conceits so pleased him, that he laughed aloud, and cried,, 44 How funny!" 44 Is it so?" said Al¬ phonsus. " Then I wish you would read it to me.'* The lad was greatly surprised to see who was near him ; he hastily rose up,. and offered Alphonsus the stone he was sitting on. ** Sir," said he, 4€ if you will sit down here, I will soon get another for myself, if you will please to hold the book." So saying, he gave Shakespear to Ab phonsus, and darted away in search of a stone. Presently, he returned with one; and» placing it beside Alphonsus, sat down.
* I give·
ms ** ï givo you a deal of trouble," saiff Se to the lad*—** You do not, indeed, Sir. I am so happy to think you^arecome ; for,, J did not expect you till evening j and, if¬ you will be so kind as4o hear me read, samd ţell me what I don't understand, I diali be very ¿such obliged toyou." " Then s fead to me," said Alphonsus* *' and I will jjive you the same instructions I received- myself; His.all 1 can do* I am not suffi¬ ciently acquainted with the English kn- guage to correct you ; but iwill point out what was-marked for me." He gave the youth, the book, and de¬ cked Wm to go on, frorn the part he was nt wheo-he interrupted him. "But that, Sir," s»d4he boy, 44 is sodroll, that I «hall not be able to*refriÂn from laughing, and tben you will not understand what I say/* * Never mind that," said Aîphoîisuss <f it bespeaks an ingenuous mind» either to« laugh or cry, according to the subject you read. I have no opinion of a person that will read all passages alike, with the same apathy*
eis apathy. Read on, and if you laugh, rø laugh, too." This settled, the lad begam^ bu* every two or three words would shout again, and his mirth had in reality such an effect on Alphonsus, that he joined in the laugh* and, for the first time since his banish¬ ment, forgot his misery. He heard the youth to the end* axiá was so much pleased, that the time imperceptibly stok on, and the kd himself forgot the hour of dinner. At length* a young m^n appeared, who seemed searching før some one* Al· phonsus remarked it* and the boy, jump¬ ing up, said: 44 Oh t dem, Sk, that is out mate'& søn % he is coming to fetch me ; now I am sure I shall get a flogging,, un¬ less you,. Sir, will g¡o wad beg me off/' 44 That I will," said Alphonsus, ** with as much pleasure as. I ever did any thing ta my Bfe· Shew me to yonr father ;'* aad, taking him. by the arra, advanced towards the young man* who* when he saw the- boy, cried; « Ah! young master, youTI get
2TG gèl ît, my lad, for not comißg home ter dinner. Master's ready for ye." u Where mum Captain i" asked Alphonsus. " f O» board, Sir,"answemd the man, 44 and wants young master." ** Go on/' said Alphon> sus r « and bring me tohim/' The maa obeyed, ¿ndthey followed. As they got over the side of the ship, they perceived Captain Berry, who was much surprised when he saw the con> panion of his son. **I am come,- Sir," said Alphonsus» ** to beg your pardony for detaining this charming boy. I met him on the strand, and requested him to lead to me* He obligingly consented, snd he has rendered me more service than ai the physicians I ever employed ; anô\ if I might BOtbe thought too intruding, I would venture toKbèg; to be indulged with his company still longen. In fået, J am so much taken with him, that I ant tempted to enYy.yoiuso- great a blessa røg/* ΐ ~ Captami
2П Captain Berry smiled, and, bowing to* Alphonsus, said He was happy to find his son worthy his notice ; and, if he T had spent his time in such good company, he should be inclined to pardon him. 44 But," said he, 4r he so often absents himself from the ship* with his books, that I was disposed to give him a good drubbing; but, as it is, I shall forgive him/' The boy's eyes sparkled with joy, and, advancing to the side of Alphonsus, he said : 4i Indeed, father, as you are so good as to forgive me for stealing away, depend upon it, I will not, while in port, go any where but to this gentleman, who lives in FranWätreet." 44 I am," said Alphonsus, " at preseni, the guest of Senhor Mertola ¿ and, tf you wiU permit your son to spend an hour or two widi me, everyday, | shall deem myself highly obliged/' Capt Berry said He had not the least objection, but was* happy ( to bave a son deserving hia attention. " I have f °
kavV* saM.h^ı; 44 th^pl^sntfe of know- ing Senhor Alertóla ι and, if you are thè gentleman that resides with him, my* zittii iş honored by/ yonr acquaintance« ** Them,, with yourlc^e," said;^ Alphon- «i% ** ϊ wait tal^ him home wtH me to dmner : fape will ber è moro acceptable guest> than the first crowned head in Eu¬ rope." ^ Goitbcm,. Bfckl·'-' said his fa¬ ther, * c and get yourself fit to accompany *Öösi gentterriaii/* Т4зе^ happy boy àia not wait for a second biddings but vanished in a^rnom€nt r ' « * * Capt. Beisy requested Alphonsus to walk into the cabins and take somfe f fru ir, whkbfiíedíck He seemed quitapleased ^t the notice taken <&М§г&ощ and assured A^phonsu^that he wa« an excdlent boý^ ^n^tpè*fon* ói Vmk%. ** For, 1 !' said Jfei < * 4 r& JisiirnpoBliW« t® keep him : aw^ frb^i thm foTf^ntömen^ and I can only get him fo ^bd^the^citmpass^when tiiere ist no bockkor pen andi ink- m tbe^ay; ind wouldiyOu^Ulieve itvStri the youngi »•■ï-îi ' dog
áog attempts to write verses; md; whea he cannot get paper, he will absolutely scrawl them oís tìie log-book 5 so, he gets flogged for it sometimes,; but it is aH to no purpose; for, as soon as my back is turned, he is at it again, with a pencil, on the sides of fhe cabin, and evenr ♦upon the head of a beer barre! ; so, I don't know what to do with him j for, it is impossible to have him always under my eye/* u 'Tis this very propensity/' said Al¬ phonsus, " that attaches me to him, and ϊ will venture to predict» that, in England, if his education is attended to, he will prove an admired writer. Believe me, Sir, you ought not to check that anxious desire he has for books; for, though a child, he has surprised me witb a pro* duction that has pleased me exceedingly; and, as I am alone for msmy hourt irr the day, there is nothmg will give me so «iuch pleasure as to hare him with « You
ρ*Α*Ψ-& Yon arf «íctremely welcome» and 1 do^'t fear his behaving well, if he don*t tire you with t|is books; whenever he does that» send bim on board/'—*· If \ do not send him home before that, 1 shall never return him at all." As he said this, Dick entered the cabin, ** I şm quite ready, Sir," said he. " Come along, then/' said Alphonsus; and, taking leave of Capt. Berry, they left the cabin. Dick skipped up stairs, as light as a feather, with Shakespear in his hand. As they crossed the harbour* to reach Frank-Street, he would alternately look at the book, and then at Alphonsus, with a degree of satisfoction, that spoke more than a thousand words. Soon after they reached Senhor Mertola's, dinner was served up $, but the lsd was so delighted, he jçould scarcely eai, though Alphonsus pressed him jreaüy- When they had dined,heput another voţume ^Shakespear in his hand. " Run it over," said he, **and
221 44 and see whut tbere ш m that voJuiue * and, by-ajad-byc» we will examine youtr poetry r I have read iţ, ю$ Uke it much." « Then, if you like it^ Sir, Гт sure 1 am happy, tnd wffl one day areib ture to write more, when I cam get some pens and paper, for that on ship-board is locked away from ще/'*»-'* Make your* self easy about that : I will furnish you with every thing you want ; you may write as much as you like in that little room (pointing to a closet in which the books were), and go to it whenever you please j only I shall beg of yau to read to me sometimes, and likewise finish the stanza to The Butterfly." They then sat down to read, and» as they had done before, read till both forgot the time, and Alphonso» was $0 much amused, that he was surprised to und so many beauties in those plays, that before he was unacquainted with. He siessed the hour he firat eaw the youth» Vol. t h and
and earnestly hoped his father would not leave Smyrna for some months. * ïn a pleasmg intercourse with this youth, and occasionally seeing the mer¬ chant and Father James, a fortnight passed on, and still uo letters ! The Father wás as much pleased as Alphonsus, and said, If Mr. Berry would consent to leave his son there, he would undertake to teach him Greek, Latin, and Turkish. The idea of having him left behind never struck Alphonsus ; but» when the Father mentioned it, he was impatient to sound the Captain. Accordingly, he waited on him, and proposed it. At first, he was averse fiom it ; but, at length, the advan¬ tages his son would derive, in having his learning attended to by two such ex¬ cellent characters, induced him to con¬ sent. It was therefore agreed, that the lad should stay with thera till his father's return to that port, which would be in about seven months \ but, if any thing sbould happen to either Alphonsus, or Father
Father James, or the boy had a desire to return to England, Senhor Mertola was to take charge of him, and see him sent there by Capt. Brindley. When this was concluded on, young Berry was the next day sent to Alphonsus* Hjs father offered to lodge a sum for his board in the hands of the merchant, but Alphonsus would not permit hira to mention it a second time, saying, He should be over-paid in the pleasure he should receive from his company and conversation. Young Berry was then delivered over by his father to the care of Alphonsus, and he, poor lad, was in rap¬ tures; for, though he loved his fathér, yet the pleasure of learning over-balanced every other consideration, and, the next day, he altered on his studies under Father James. He took his lessons with avidity, and his protectors were happy to instruct him. He saw his father daily, and Alphonsus, ftom having something to engross his attention, became less un- L 2 bappy*
happy, \ /Yet f in sprte of ev<ny thing, bis heart still panted after news from Lisbon* Berry had been on hoard his fathers #Ыр* to take If ave of hkn, previous to his leaving Smyrna, when ţie saw a vessel enter tbe harbour« Anxious to learn whether she was from Portugal, he de¬ sired his father to hail her, and, to his great joy, heard she came direct from Lisbon. He flew lake lightning to Al¬ phonsus, wlio lost not a moment in going down, and, in foss than an hour, he had the satisfaction of having a large packet put into his hands by the Captam.-«« He hastened borne in violent agitation, anxious to know the contents, yet fearing to be informed. He sat down, the packet in his hand, tut whkh he hesitated to open. Berry observed his agitation, and asked Whe¬ ther he should toţm it for hím ι 44 For Vm sure," said he, ** I Ьоре к ferfog» good news/* «Ihopeitdoes^'^daiUphonstts» sigh-
225 sighing deeply, * c but I fear----- -" 44 Ah ! pray, don't fear ; for you are too good to be unhappy."—" Ah ! my poor boy, you are but little acquainted with the ills of life, and may you ever be a stranger to them Γ —** t hope I snail, Sir, and you, too; so, pray, let me open it/' Alphonsus nodded assent» and the boy instantly obeyed. The first that met the eye was a letter, which Alphonsus knew to be directed in the hand-writing of Capt. Brindley. The other, a very large packet, was in a hand he was un¬ acquainted with. " I will take the smallest letter first/* said Alphonsus. The lad gave it him» and said He hoped, now, his dear friend would be happy. *· While you read that," said he» «* if you please, I'll go and write ; and, when you have done, I will come and open the large packet/' He then hastened away» and left the poor Alphonsus a prey alternately to fear, hope, and anxiety.—* L 0 At
í$iŕ6 At fe^lh, lie itomoneé fcèurage, and Ч>рейЫ it*-4t wm îrdm Ca^ti&i Brind· 44 My tnuoh valued Friend, ** iHáTE tte great happiees» of informing you that I reached Lisbon in perfect safety, mfi weil, ora the 16th 'of this month, and fost not a moment ¿a making my entries at the Custom-house, which having dispistched, 1 hastened m шок ^uréi^iâ, же*рЬ}шшшо ι land, to my great sátisfactbn, found aim 'm the mme Uttle house on the pbra. I was not long m comniumcatâng my büsb- ^s#. Ile çecémd me with âU the warmth of sincere and ardent friendship. The hearing of % fmr ^fety wias a plea- ®me to İtim %β kn^wîiiot how to ек- ţiress, -as he had for^many ^months given you over m dead. I gave him a particu¬ lar account <ør &U Uiat bad happened, since ! í i
шев my having the îicmor of being known to you. He expressed the greatest satk^crian at heairjng yom bad so mira- culous an escape for your life, at the time you were last at Lisbon, lbr 70u wene assîcbotfsîy sought afier, tmd, ата yon mot »quitted it -wlim^ou did # airølhex day, жк! you would fttmre Ьееплю^шше· Therefore, ike person tìiat «ent yøn tìie warning must have been in ¿be confi- dence of yonr enemies. The mother friend -wi yours, that aided your escape &©ш the Doqtor's, is ¡likewise Jbere¿ and in «health. ♦* I have alsøiseen the good *>ld Bene¬ dicta ímd her son. î cfeeered Iter æged àieart, by mforming her *tfaat you iwere imng, for which she -returned thanks to every Saint inthe calendar. Herjsonis still with her, And &as &jt Ш етрЪу- ment underone of-the En ğl ish architects. The "building does not proceed ¿With that ïaciliry I was Jed to^expeçt; ^and,when f look
look round» ând view tto ruins that JtìSl meet my efe in Ш 'directions* I am happy to think you are not here to behold it. ** I h»ve not yet been to the Convent of St* John, but shall put it off till within a few hours of шу departure, for fear of consequences ; and the more readily, as your good friend» the Doctor, has pro- Hiked to write to you every particular of what befel him, after he last saw you, and all that he knows relative to your family, which is I believe a great deal, from what he said to me this morning.—- Whatever answer I shall receive from Father Jerome, he has promised to trans¬ mit to you, as my stay here will be so short, tliat I should not be able to make that deliberate enquiry into your affairs, which their present obscurity appears to require ; for, however I may respect the ,eMrgy, bcannot say I like them. They cer¬ tainly are »ot your friends. Be assured I shall
I shall not ¡шш туеШц т&Ы m done, which you enjoined nte. * * , > 44 One riece^liii^genotl^ii gfive you ; it is, Thf** your brotheit is «^in#4 Ю Usbon, He was at court y#sterdfiy> for the first tiine. J shall contuk with the Doctor, whether H wţlJtbe føst fiprmt to wait upon him, and informi Ыщ, of your being living, imd wfefère, h t e might write to you; bat I йшД do, notiMng without first consulting hum " The Royal Family are stiU in tem¬ porary buildings, though the artificers use all the dispatch in their power. Yonr brother, к seems, is very much af¬ fected at the scenes of desolation that every where present tberaseţvea; but what would he have said or thought, bad be seen it six or eight months ¿agoi I ahall not in this recount¿aaay partíou!ar% which can be more largely related,by*the good Doctor. I have desired him to enter on the relation immediately, and
то *end it yoiíJby the first ship that saus for Smyrna. 44 This Short intelligence, I hope, will give you some degree of satisfaction, and I trust in fhe Almighty it will find you M better health and spirits than when I left you. My voyage to England, 4 høpe, wül· be short, and, in a few mouths, I shall have the pleasure of seeing you again. A war is still talk¬ ed of p but I sincerely pray it may be averted. 44 May the God of Heaven give yon that comfort which you so much stand in need of, and may the intelligence уош wffl receive restore your wounded heart to peace, is the sincere wish of him, wha will ever be proud to rank among your foithfol friends, and be ever ready êo render you every service in his power* 44 Ί. Brinblby/' n· * ι - "P, S*
231 " P* S. This will be sent off by the first vessel that sails for Smyrna, either with or without the packet; butl hope that will soon follow."
END OF VOLUME THE SECOND.
