THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST

Pierre de la Motte is in debt and obliged to leave Paris quickly if he wishes to avoid arrest. During their flight from Paris the La Mottes acquire a companion, the girl Adeline, who is thrust upon them at gunpoint by her cottager father. (Adeline is an involuntary participant; she was taken from the convent where she went to school by this father who seems not to want her.) They find a ruined abbey and decide to stay there, as their carriage is incapacitated by a broken wheel. The La Mottes are reunited with their soldier son Louis, who fortuitously discovers their hiding place.
The abbey seems a good refuge until the owner arrives; he is the Marquis de Montalt, with whom La Motte has evidently had previous dealings. He is accompanied by the young chevalier Theodore, whom Adeline clearly likes. Louis loves Adeline but his passion is not reciprocated. Montalt wants Adeline too and employs La Motte to encourage her acquiescence to his alternating propositions and proposals. All this while there are other adventures and misunderstandings: Adeline finds a room with a bloodstained dagger and the manuscript notes of a captive; Madame de la Motte thinks Adeline is having an affair with her husband and is cold to her. Finally Montalt kidnaps Adeline and takes her to a plush establishment from which she is rescued by Theodore, who has turned deserter for her sake. (The Marquis de Montalt is unfortunately his colonel.) The pair are full of rectitude and try not even to talk about love during the delicate circumstances of their escape. At an inn Theodore is attacked and taken away by military police, and Adeline is carried back by the servants of the Marquis.
The Marquis, when he sees the mark of a seal in Adeline's possession, loses his sexual ambitions and wants La Motte to kill her instead. La Motte, however, is not altogether a bad man; he helps her to escape. At an inn at Savoy she falls ill and is nursed by the La Luc family, with whom she afterward lives. As it turns out, Theodore is La Luc's son, and Louis arrives to explain that the young man is in a military prison under sentence of death. There are affecting scenes in the prison between Theodore and his ailing old father, but at the last moment a respite is granted because Madame La Motte has written a letter bearing on Montalt's character. (At this time we discover that the Marquis was blackmailing La Motte for having once robbed him in the forest.) Other answers are supplied. Adeline is really the daughter of Montalt's elder brother, whose journal of imprisonment she had read in the abbey; this conclusion is not easily reached, for we briefly suppose her to be the bastard child of Montalt and an Ursaline nun. His villainy having been revealed, the Marquis de Montalt poisons himself and Adeline inherits. Theodore is pardoned; he marries Adeline after a period of mourning for her real father. La Motte is banished. La Luc's health improves. The La Luc daughter marries a pleasant minor character, and Louis later finds a suitable wife.