THE LAST MAN

The Last Man takes place in the twenty-first century, though it is not (barring the dates, the abolition of the British monarchy, and a reference to air-balloon transport) a discernibly futuristic novel. Lionel Verney and his sister Perdita, early orphaned, bring themselves up in Cumberland. Lionel, according to his own description, is changed from beast to human by the sudden friendship of Adrian, the son of England's last king, who abdicated in 2073. Adrian is in love with a Greek princess, Evadne, a young friend of his mother's, but he is passed over in favor of Lord Raymond, a rather Byronic gentleman who is a hero of the Greek wars and something of a public figure. Raymond, however, appears to be planning a marriage to Adrian's sister Idris, through whom he hopes to restore the monarchy. (Adrian is a firm republican.) At the last moment he abandons his political aspirations to marry Perdita instead, which leaves Idris and Lionel free to marry each other. The two couples and Adrian, friends all around, settle down in the neighborhood of Windsor Castle.
Later Raymond is chosen Lord Protector, and he and Perdita move to London. There he accidentally finds Evadne, destitute, and resumes a relationship with her. Perdita, who has been feeling a growing estrangement, shuts off her love for Raymond and returns to Windsor. Raymond and Adrian, after a bit, go to Greece to fight the Turks. Having heard a rumor that Raymond is dead, though she does not believe it, Perdita goes to Greece to find him. He is in fact a prisoner, but the Turks free him lest he cause political trouble by dying in their dungeons; he is a great hero in Greece. Despite his weakened condition he leads an assault against Constantinople, a city that proves to have been emptied by the severity of the plague, and that his men are afraid to enter. He rides in alone and is blown up by some cleverly contrived powder charges. Although Perdita insists upon staying by his tomb in Greece, Lionel unwisely drugs her and puts her on a boat for England. She jumps overboard, wearing a tag that will direct her corpse to Athens, and drowns.
Soon, and here we come to the central business of the novel, the plague that emptied Constantinople spreads over Europe. Further, the weather is taking unaccountable turns and a report comes in from the East that a black sun had appeared along with the regular one. England avoids contagion for a little longer and is filled with refugees, but at last the plague begins in London. Adrian consents for humanitarian reasons to be Lord Protector. Shelley describes changes of attitude and behavior brought about by the progress of the malady, especially the leveling of social distinctions. In 2096 the survivors, fewer than two thousand, decide to leave England for a more moderate climate. Before they go, Lionel's elder boy dies of the disease, while he himself has it and recovers. Idris appears to be dying of grief and expires in a snowstorm as they go to the rescue of a deserving cottager and her rheumatic mother, who have been abandoned in the general emigration. Lionel's family now consists of a younger son, Perdita and Raymond's adolescent daughter Clara, and Adrian. Arrived in Paris, the refugees fall into three contending factions, including an especially vicious and fanatic religious one. Adrian reconciles the other two, and the refugees arrange to spend the summer in Switzerland. The journey is nightmarish, with decayed bodies and spectral figures all along the way, and nearly everyone dies. Finally, in Switzerland, only Lionel and Adrian and the two children are left alive. The plague seems to be over, but that winter the younger child dies of typhus. Soon after that Adrian and Clara drown and Lionel is left alone. He lingers in Rome for a while, writing his memoirs, and then sets off with a few books (Homer and Shakespeare, mostly) to hunt for another survivor.
Lionel's story, according to the Author's Introduction, was found written on leaves and bark, in a variety of languages, in the Cumaean Sibyl's cave in 1818. This eccentricity of chronology is acknowledged but not explained.