THE NOCTURNAL MINSTREL, OR, THE SPIRIT OF THE WOOD

The Baroness Fitzwalter sits with her attendant Winifred
in her castle near the Scottish border and listens to the lovely and mysterious music that issues from the forest at twilight. She likes to think that it may be the benevolent spirit of her husband, to whose memory she is faithful despite the importunate courtship of Sir Reginald Harcland. In fact, she would very much like to send Sir Reginald home and finds an excuse to do so upon learning the otherwise disheartening news that the Earl of Ormond is coming to see her and can by royal authority marry her if he wants. (She is a ward of state, her husband having complicated their lives by espousing the cause of Perkin Warbeck.) Winifred, however, admires Sir Reginald and supports his courtship; her support is of some moment, for Winifred is a wily domestic tyrant who bullies the other servants and especially persecutes Ethelind and her boyfriend Edgar, who are, respectively, a peasant girl under the Baroness's protection and the promising son of a vassal. Sir Reginald behaves badly upon being asked to leave and claims to have had a dream in which the late Baron's ghost said that he did not want his wife to marry Ormond.
People begin to hear clattering, as of falling armor, in the late Baron's chamber. Cruel Winifred shuts Ethelind up in the chamber for claiming to have seen an armed figure there, but she is consoled by Edgar, who creeps in disguised as Mr. Motley the jester. The Baroness takes all the uproar as additional evidence of her late husband's disapproval and tells Ormond that she will not marry him, the king notwithstanding. Ormond is kind and humble, really a thoroughly nice man, and offers to sit up in the haunted room. On the third night he follows a beckoning ghost, but this is a mistake, for the "ghost" is Sir Reginald, who locks him in a subterranean vault. People think Ormond has disappeared in some uncanny way and hold a special mass, which is disrupted, even demoralized, by knockings from under the floor (they are Ormond's). At this point a kind of wizard arrives and offers to lay the castle ghost. During the subsequent ritual he reveals himself to be the still-living Baron; Sir Reginald had lied to the Baroness about his death, and had told him in turn that the Baroness was dead. Edgar finds and releases Ormond and is made steward in the place of the corrupt incumbent, who like Winifred is demoted to ordinary vassal. Ethelind and Edgar marry. Ormond procures a pardon for the Baron, marries someone else, and becomes a family friend. Sir Reginald repents and makes a pilgrimage to Rome. The Baron and the Baroness, who are still young, produce a son who grows up and marries Ormond's daughter.