MARCHMONT. A NOVEL

After her mother's death, Althea Dacres was raised by her aunt Mrs. Trevyllian; her father married a second wife who bought him a baronet's title and bore him several children. When Mrs. Trevyllian is obliged to nurse a friend with a contagious fever, Althea is sent to stay with her father and his family. Though her father rather likes her, her stepmother does not, nor do her sisters, and she is pursued by "odious Mr. Mohun," a rude and conceited lawyer whom her father wishes her to marry. Mrs. Trevyllian herself falls ill and dies, leaving Althea an unwelcome and incompatible guest in her father's shallow and vicious household. Intractable on the question of marriage to Mohun, she is sent as punishment to a remote and decaying manor house that formerly belonged to the Marchmont family. Althea has already met young Mr. Marchmont at the home of the Eversleys, friends of her aunt, and has found him attractive. Stories of his virtue and of his hardships abound at her new residence and she is increasingly prepossessed in his favor. He has been trying hard but without much success to meet the debts left by a profligate father and to support his mother and sisters.
As winter closes in on the manor house, Althea and the servants begin to hear disquieting noises and to see inexlicable sights (e.g., an unidentified animal running down the corridors). These are explained by the discovery of Marchmont, hiding in his old home from an unscrupulous crew who would clap him into prison for debt. The principal villain is an unusually loathsome attorney named Vampyre. Althea helps Marchmont flee into exile; in the course of his escape they discover their mutual attraction and achieve a vague understanding about future affiliation. After the sudden death of her father Althea feels stripped of refuges and arranges to board with the Marchmont family, who after some hesitation are going into trade. Althea adds her fancywork to the productions of the Marchmont sisters and despite unkind gossip, difficulty about collecting the interest due from her small inheritance, and some doubts about the propriety of staying after Marchmont returns, she finds the arrangement a happy one. When Marchmont comes home they marry. After three weeks, however, Vampyre and company catch up and send the bridegroom to prison. Disasters and betrayals multiply, but just when spirits are at an all-time low and Marchmont is about to try writing as a trade, Althea inherits money from a cousin, an unexpected and elderly relative befriends Marchmont, and old friends generally rally round, so they have a happy issue out of all their afflictions.