MONTBRASIL ABBEY, OR, MATERNAL TRIALS. A TALE

The Elvington sisters, Elenor, Agnes, and Constance, have separate histories which occur simultaneously and are woven together through the family correspondence.
Elenor, who is romantic and convinced that love amidst poverty has some innate attraction, is courted by Richmond. When her mother rejects him as a suitor for her, feeling that he has no prospects, he and Elenor elope. Although, or perhaps because, she feels guilty, she does not write to her mother afterward. She and Richmond are wretchedly poor. Two of their three little girls die; Richmond himself has died before the birth of the third child. At last her sister Agnes finds her and takes her home to Mrs. Elvington.
Agnes, who is determined to marry wealth, visits Melbourne Castle, where she hears ghost stories which she passes on to her romantic sister Elenor, and where she meets two young men. She and the Honourable Major Arbuthnot fall in love; he is a rather freespoken young man, but not quite a rake. She foolishly marries the Marquis of Montbrasil instead, apparently not for his greater worthiness, though he is the better man, but for his social position. She has a child and attempts to distract herself with gaming, but neither these diversions nor her good intentions stifle her continuing love for Arbuthnot. Arbuthnot consciously decides to throw away virtue, but he is not a ready villain, for he has scruples and suffers. Nevertheless, he and Agnes run away, taking along the baby and pursued by the Marquis, who in the end kills Arbuthnot. The Marquis at first flees the country but later decides to come back and stand trial. He is acquitted. His return permits him to be at hand so that Agnes, who is dying of grief, remorse, and shame, may expire in his arms. He returns to live in France, leaving his child with the Elvingtons.
Constance, who has always argued for a "thankful middle station," has been with her mother through the escapades of her sisters. She loves Edward Beverly, whose father wishes him to marry an orphaned cousin and withholds his sanction from Constance. At last he comes to admire Constance's honorable resistance to Beverly's suit and permits them to marry. It is clear that Constance's middle way is best.