THE NUN OF SANTA MARIA DI TINDARO. A TALE

The narrator shelters overnight at a convent and is given for her moral instruction the memoirs which make up the body of this tale. They tell the story of Helena, a nun who has recently died and whose bad experiences in the outside world caused her to take the veil.
Helena's father has withdrawn from the world and done his best to make her suspicious of everything; he is cynical because Helena's mother ran off with De Beaufort. He tells Helena that if she has anything to do with any De Beauforts he will put her in a nunnery. Unfortunately she meets the son of the man her father so dislikes and they fall in love. Under constant threat of nunneries, Helena runs off with her lover and they undergo a marriage ceremony which later proves to have been invalid. Her father takes her defection badly. Eugenius, her husband, goes to fight for the aristocracy in the French Revolution, and Helena stays with the mother of his friend Angerville. She has a baby.
Angerville covets Helena and begins to scheme. He leaves in plain sight a letter that mentions that Eugenius is already married to someone else. Eugenius, who does love her, returns to nurse her through the shock of the disclosure but admits its truth; the other marriage was undertaken as some kind of duty and is loveless. He trusts his friend Angerville to take care of Helena when he has to leave again. Angerville wins her sympathies by weeping on her shoulder about an unidentified woman whom he loves; not knowing that it is herself, she prays for his happiness. He is such a villain that he betrays Eugenius into an ambush and imprisons him, then acts solicitous. Helena still believes in him, even though she has a dream about his being evil. After she is given a chance to save her husband by giving herself to some other unspecified man, she overhears Angerville's voice and realizes that he is a villain. The shock is acute. Eugenius dies attempting to escape. Helena finds that her mother has given herself to the Prefect to save her father, who is in prison too. She removes herself to a convent and writes her memoirs, which the narrator says have been most uplifting.