THE SPECTRE OF LANMERE ABBEY, OR, THE MYSTERY OF THE BLUE AND SILVER BAG

Agnes Bennet, husbandless, is begging in order to support herself and her three-year-old daughter Charlotte. Lady Cecelia Martimel impulsively offers to educate the child but, having second thoughts, decides to give her back to Agnes, whom she is expecting to consult the next morning; Agnes, however, discovers from Lady Cecelia's card that she is the wife of her seducer, and never comes to the interview. Lady Cecelia is consequently less than delighted with Charlotte and sends her with a housekeeper to Martimel Castle in Wales. There she is educated by a Mrs. Stockley, a recent arrival in the neighborhood, who wears a black shade over her face to hide a cancer. Nearby is Lanmere Abbey, property of the Godolphins, whose son and daughter both died young, the latter apparently by throwing herself in the river to avoid a forced marriage. In fact, the Godolphins' daughter Mary did not die - she is Agnes, currently masquerading as Mrs. Stockley, and is responsible for the "spectral" visitations that punctuate the story. She only pretended to drown herself. She was married to Sir Everard Martimel, who later, tiring of the marriage, suggested that it probably was not legal. He has for years felt that he killed her and has kept all the papers pertaining to the marriage in a blue and silver bag, about which there is some suspense in the course of the novel (e.g., it is stolen and sent back empty).
Other complications are initiated by Alderton, the Godolphins' nephew, who was once rejected by Mary/Agnes, who poisoned the Godolphins' son Albert, and who is now jealous of their relationship with Charlotte. The first time he kidnaps Charlotte, she is rescued by her mother, who has herself escaped from confinement arranged by Alderton. The second time he kidnaps Charlotte, he is prevented from stabbing her by the ghost of Albert. Charlotte, who has her sewing materials, cuts letters from a book and stitches them to a blank page and throws them out the window; they are found by a young man named Hubert, who later marries her. By the time Agnes dies, she and Charlotte have been reunited with the Godolphins and everything has worked out satisfactorily.