THE ROMANCE OF SMYRNA, OR, THE PREDICTION FULFILLED!!!

Alphonsus has had a difficult life. He is the second son of the Duke of Aranjuez, who had a murder on his conscience and disappeared after seeing a spirit with a prophetic scroll which said, among other things, that the house will become extinct when a fair maiden is murdered by her adoring mother. Alphonsus had a sister who died in a convent. His mother was somehow suspicious of his infant son, thinking that it looked too old for its apparent age. His wife disappeared in the Lisbon earthquake and he himself, believed dead, is unable to prove he is not an imposter.
As the story opens, a lay brother gives Alphonsus a purse, with instructions to go abroad at once. He meets a number of people in his travels and the reader is subjected to all their histories, some of which are unusually bizarre. Alphonsus's three most important acquaintances are an elderly male wanderer who passes through and will be heard of later, a book-loving child named Dick Berry whom Alphonsus volunteers to educate, and old Muley, who is retained as Dick's tutor. It is Muley who contrives to read the mysterious writing on the purse, thus causing Alphonsus to arrive at Joppa in time to discover that the old wanderer (known as Doctor Pilgrim) is his father, and to be present at his death.
Both before and after this event the household receives a most alarming series of letters from home, revealing all sorts of bad news and shocking information. The most striking information Alphonsus receives is a deathbed history from his wife Alizra. Her parents were an escaped nun and a younger son of good family. Educated in a convent, she was removed by her uncle Don Joseph, ostensibly to be a companion to his other niece, an invalid. In fact, she was meant to replace the other niece, who was dying, as her uncle's mistress. He drugged and raped her, buying her subsequent cooperation with threats of the Inquisition. Later she was forced to marry Alphonsus. The baby is of course her uncle's. During the earthquake Don Joseph caught her again, but this time she informed on him. He poisoned her in revenge.
Alphonsus's brother Xavier, too, has difficulties of the heart. The girl he loves is in love with someone else, who is too poor to marry her. He nobly offers to get the other man a position as aide-de-camp to the Prince of Brazil, but her parents stubbornly refuse; they want Xavier for her. In a domestic altercation on this topic the mother strikes the girl with a knife, accidentally hitting her bosom and knocking her downstairs. This appears pertinent to the spirit's prophecy at the beginning. And indeed both Alphonsus and Xavier die before the end of the novel, thus ending the family line. Only Dick, who is overseen by Muley and the ship's captain until he grows up, lives happily.