PRIORY OF ST. BERNARD. AN OLD ENGLISH TALE

In the time of Henry II a new Lord Raby comes into his estate, which includes the Priory of St. Bernard. A villain named Manston (his uncle, it appears) manages to take away his property despite the efforts of a woman who turns out to be Raby's mother, and Raby hides himself in a peasant cottage. Raby, when he earlier encountered his mother in the priory, did not recognize her because during his infancy his father had deserted his wife and two daughters; he put them in the priory for safekeeping during wartime and failed to reclaim them, but he kept his infant son with him. Family relationships of all sorts are tremendously complicated. Edmund, who is supposedly Manston's son but who is in sympathy with Raby and his sisters, is informed that he is really the son of a hermit, formerly his tutor, the real Earl of Manston. The false Manston, hereinafter called De Courcy, has gone, according to the hermit, to Palestine in order to produce some heroics which might make the king authorize his marriage to Raby's sister Laura. Raby and his other sister, Maud, lead an army on a crusade, and Edmund's sister (or perhaps foster sister) Julia simply runs away, having been too much courted by a profligate. All these disappearances frustrate the efforts of Edmund and his real father to bring about any good in the private sector but they join the army and fight well for King Richard.
At the Battle of Joppa, De Courcy brings to King Richard an old Saracen named Abudah and his daughter Zoraide. Abudah, however, admits that Zoraide is really "Christian Elmira"; simultaneously, the king looks at her and recognizes her as his "lost Berengeria," his wife. Raby also loves her but she is sacrificed to a marriage with King Seofrid of Cyprus, who will keep the peace of Christendom on no other condition. Her unhappy life is ended prematurely when she throws herself into a fight between Raby and Seofrid and is accidentally stabbed by the latter. More identities are revealed as Lucius, a page acquired by Raby and Maud, proves to be the runaway Julia, who was called Eleonora during her childhood in Wales. She was at that period raised by a woman called Alice, whose real name is Emma and whose real relationship to Julia is maternal. "Lucius" has confessed he identity during a decline brought about by frustrated love for Raby, but Raby consents to marry her and thereby cures her. Edmund and Laura marry as well, and Maud goes into a nunnery of which the abbess is Alice/Emma. The king takes away De Courcy's ill-gotten gains and banishes him from court. The real Earl of Manston at the end of the novel dies blessing all the appropriate people.