HE FARMER OF INGLEWOOD FOREST. A NOVEL

As the novel begins, Farmer Godwin has a good life with his wife and three children, William, Edwin, and Emma. W1ll1am and Edwin are courting the daughters of a neighboring family, Fanny and Agnes Bernard. This rural idyll is interrupted by a coaching accident that brings the widowed Mrs. Delmar and her unhappily married brother Mr. Whitmore, both in their twenties, to stay with the Godwins. Whitmore is a libertine and begins a flirtation with Emma. When he goes back to London he takes Edwin, the more ambitious of the brothers, to place as a clerk. In the wicked city Edwin's principles deteriorate rather rapidly: he reads novels, drinks, games, and is seduced by a girl named Sophy. Mrs. Delmar finds him attractive enough to marry and makes him a socially plausible husband by buying him a commission in the army. Edwin is silent about his marriage when he goes home to the farm, the more so since he finds himself still drawn to Agnes. When he returns to London he takes his sister Emma with him. The swiftness of her moral decline makes Edwin's look leisurely. When Whitmore needs to flee to France after a duel he persuades Emma to go with him. Apparently with some notion of retaliation, Edwin sleeps with Mrs. Whitmore. He has, as well, contrived to ruin Agnes. At last William comes to London to inquire after Emma's welfare; there he learns of his brother's marriage and his sister's ruin and finds Edwin himself lolling about with Mrs. Whitmore. In the subsequent familial distress Mrs. Godwin has convulsions and dies.
The pregnant and intermittently lunatic Agnes is removed, with Fanny in attendance, to a house belonging to Mrs. Palmer, the benevolent lady of the local manor. Agnes's baby is christened Anna Palmer and given to Fanny to bring home and nurse, for Fanny was pregnant too but miscarried from the stress of Agnes's delivery. The baby is to be given to her godmother after her infancy. Edwin arrives unexpectedly and secretly, just in time to raise a coffin lid and see the corpse of Agnes holding the corpse of Fanny's baby, though Edwin naturally supposes the dead child to be his own. He suffers from some resultant lunacy but ultimately goes to France, where he finds Emma, who is guilty but prosperous. He duels and kills Whitmore, which so angers Emma that she refuses his protection and instead goes away with a man named Hartford.
Years pass. Anna Palmer is thirteen, William and Fanny's son Reuben is fourteen, and his two siblings Edward and Agnes rather younger. The children begin one at a time to travel to London under the protection of adults. Reuben and William see Emma at the theater but are unable to find her afterward. (Later William and Fanny find her nearly frozen outside their house. She has been a prostitute and has come home to die penitent. She reports that Edwin is alive, rich, and wicked.) Both Edward and Anna, on their turns to travel, become friends with Editha Fitzmorris, an excellent young woman though the child of a libertine father. Mrs. Palmer permits Anna to visit Editha, whereupon the girl falls prey to the complicated schemes of Editha's father, who turns out to be Edwin. He drugs Anna and is about to rape her when he sees on her finger a ring that he had given Agnes and had last seen on her finger in her coffin. This deters him temporarily, but he persuades himself that he is the victim of a coincidence. (This is not his first accidental brush with incest. He very nearly had Emma during her career of prostitution, but was prevented by his own drunkenness and a warning dream of hers.) Anna is preserved for a while by the canny stubbornness of a black female servant whose freedom Editha had negotiated, but at last he assaults the elderly servant and carries Anna off by force. William and Reuben arrive just in time. Edwin shoots himself. Editha and her brother are taken into the Godwin family, and their generation intermarry in suitable ways.