THE RECESS, OR, A TALE OF OTHER TIMES

Matilda and Elinor are brought up in a stony recess, formerly a convent, by Mrs. Marlow, who admits that she is not their mother. The recess is on the estate of their uncle Lord Scroope, and they are attended by another uncle, Father Anthony, a Roman Catholic priest. Mrs. Marlow and Father Anthony were once married but right after the wedding found out that they were brother and sister. The girls are really the twin daughters of Mary Queen of Scots by Lady Scroope's brother Norfolk; Matilda resembles her royal mother.
When the girls are old enough, Matilda falls in love with Leicester, whom they found in trouble and hid in the recess. They marry and keep it secret. This causes some awkwardness, as Sir Philip Sidney falls in love with Matilda and Rose Cecil wants Leicester, to whom Queen Elizabeth proposes as well. The couple flee to the recess but are there captured by an arrogant and unscrupulous ex-soldier who once tried to threaten them into giving him Elinor; instead they shanghaied him onto Drake's ship for a long voyage. Now he is home and eager for revenge. They escape, thanks to a miraculous burst of lightning which shows them the right door, and Leicester smashes their captor's head. Rose Cecil, who lives in the house formerly occupied by Uncle Scroope, helps them get away to France and comes with them. This leaves Elinor unprotected in Elizabeth's court. When the Queen hears of Leicester's departure, she hits Elinor with a book and knocks her out, consequently discovering the identifying papers she wears, which precipitate Mary's execution. Soldiers coming to arrest Matilda and Leicester accidentally kill the latter. Matilda finally escapes to further tribulations - slave uprisings in Jamaica, rheumatic fever, imprisonment. At last she returns to England to find Elinor insane and to learn her story.
Elinor and Essex were in love but delayed marrying. Elinor was forced by Burleigh to sign a document denying her parentage in return for his tearing up the order for Queen Mary's execution. And she is obliged to marry another man to save Essex's head. This is only the beginning of her trouble. She has spells of partial insanity, loses her reputation, is denied by her brother King James, is wounded in a skirmish in Ireland, is shipwrecked. All this time she is trying to rejoin Essex. Before they manage much time together he is condemned to die and she goes mad. After Matilda comes home, Elinor sits in the snow too long one day, catches a fever, and dies in front of Essex's picture. For a while it looks as though Matilda's fortunes are changing, for James seems disposed to recognize her. But it comes to nothing, her daughter Mary is poisoned, and Matilda declines and writes these memoirs for a friend.