ROMANTIC TALES

Summaries of the prose tales follow. I have not taken notes on the eight poems.
"Mistrust; or Blanche and Osbright." Osbright of Frankheim and Blanche of Orrenberg suffer the effects of a long train of hostility and misunderstanding between their houses. Indeed, Blanche herself mistrusts the house of Frankheim and falls in love with Osbright only because she does not know who he is, but that is a later part of the story. As the tale begins, Osbright has come back from the wars just in time to see the funeral of his little brother Jocelyn, who his father is wrongly convinced was murdered by the Orrenbergs. To compound the apparent outrage, one of Jocelyn's fingers is missing. The reader, however, comes to suspect that the Orrenbergs are not such a villainous crew; the vassals are hotheaded, and Blanche has imbibed some wrong notions from her suspicious mother, Ulrica, but Blanche's father is a good man and still loyal to Frankheim, with whom he was once on friendly terms. The Orrenberg vassals, by the way, believe the Frankheims to have murdered Philip, Blanche's little brother.
Complications multiply. An insolent herald from Frankheim who comes to accuse Orrenberg of murder is killed by Orrenberg's vassals. Later a Sir Ottokar, who is both friend to Orrenberg and kinsman by marriage to Frankheim, goes to Frankheim for diplomatic purposes and is murdered at Frankheim's orders. Meanwhile some difficulties of a more personal sort are distracting Osbright. His young half brother Eugene (son of Frankheim and a nun), who dislikes him from jealousy, has also fallen in love with Blanche despite the unsuitability of his station. When Eugene sees Osbright and Blanche together he goes mad; because he wishes Blanche to kill him he chases her with a sword, an action that is understandably misconstrued by Ottokar, who stabs Eugene, though not fatally. Eugene's insanity persists and his father becomes increasingly unbalanced from guilt and rage. Frankheim decides to kidnap Blanche, who, having been forewarned of this, puts on Osbright's armor as a disguise. In consequence she is captured by her own father's men. Osbright, who has walked out of their retreat in Blanche's clothing, is assassinated by his father's hirelings. Frankheim kills himself in remorse. Blanche pines for a few years and dies, Eugene wanders off to the Holy Land and disappears and the two mothers go into a convent, where they raise a monument to their children: "Here rest the Victims of Mistrust."
And what of Jocelyn's missing finger? And who really killed him? One stormy night Osbright is stranded in the forest and enters a hut, where he finds his little brother's finger boiling in a cauldron. Observing that "there seems to be something improper going on here," he elicits from the young lady who tends the cauldron the information that Jocelyn died defending himself from a wolf with his dagger. The girl found him too late to save him and was later sent back by her grandmother to procure his finger (nearly severed in the struggle) for its value in magical potions.

"The Anaconda." Everard Brooks returns from India wealthy, only to discover that rumor (rumor propagated by the aunt of the girl he loves) accuses him of having killed in India a fiancee named Anne O'Connor; all the most grisly details of his clubbing her to death are common property. He tells the real story, which is not about Anne O'Connor but about an anaconda that trapped his employer, Mr. Seafield, in a summer pavilion. Brooks at last devised a scheme for stupifying the snake by letting it eat a cow, and then killing it. The stratagem came too late for Seafield who soon died from the suffocating effects of the anaconda's offensive breath. But Seafield wanted Brooks to marry his widow and left them the property jointly, so when the widow grieved herself to death, Brooks became a rich man. With the mystery dissolved Brooks marries his English sweetheart.

"The Four Facardins." I shall not describe this rather fantastic and convoluted piece in detail, but it involves four men each of whom is named Facardin and has his own activities: The adventures have a fairy-tale tone at times, being stocked with giants, witches, curious costumes, and so on. The tone, too, can be un-Gothically frivolous: " ... have you really reached the age of one-and-twenty without having once been turned into a blue bear or a china tea-pot?"

"My Uncle's Garret Window." The narrator has a telescope through which he watches the family next door as if he were at a play. He keeps notes on their domestic sorrows and joys and misunderstandings. Their drama turns out well and the narrator decides to make friends with one of them.