GWELYGORDD, OR, THE CHILD OF SIN. A TALE OF WELSH ORIGIN

Lucy Charmont was born in Newgate and chosen from the Philanthropic Charity by Admiral Maurice, who gave her to his sister Lady Apreuth. Her new foster sisters named her Charmont after the brother in Otway's Orphan and have grown to be very fond of her, for she is sensible, beautiful, and loyal. She receives a number of proposals despite her shocking parentage but turns them all down. She would like to marry Lord Atheling but is worried about her lower-class background, so refuses him until she learns that family upsets have stripped him of his title and that he is going to the East Indies. Thereupon she dons male clothing and arrives at the dock asking to go along. The couple marry, and Lucas makes the point that Lucy has not, as is the way of heroines, suddenly acquired upper-class parents to facilitate the marriage; virtue, Lucas says, is pedigree enough.
There are two amusing minor plots. The first involves Mr. James Howell, a tenant's son who was educated by Lady Apreuth and has turned Methodist preacher. Lucy has to ask him not to proselytize Lady Apreuth's servants. At last his zeal leads him to marry Miss Sally Coral, a beautiful fish seller, for he wishes to convert a wicked wife, and Sally swears magnificently. It is a keen disappointment for him to discover that she is really virtuous, and that she is shocked at his expecting her to swear at home. The other plot, brief but fascinating, is provided by Dr. Wardine, whom Atheling meets in his travels. Wardine says that Frankenstein is a true story, with some of the particulars altered. In Ingolstadt Wardine met Henry Clerval, a servant of Victor Frankenstein's, from whom he learned how to make some easy money. Clerval said that his master was experimenting with the creation of life but was clearly afraid of succeeding; if Wardine would put on suitable clothes, lie down in the laboratory, and "come to life," he could subsequently extort money from the frightened scientist. Wardine did this but finally revealed the whole plot to Frankenstein, who wrote it up, altering the real circumstances to their more dramatic fictitious counterparts, and published it under the name of Mary Shelley.