THE ALBIGENSES. A ROMANCE

Religious wars and persecutions are central to this novel. Sir Paladour, whose background is mysterious even to him, exterminates heretics and fights Raymond of Toulouse. He loves Isabelle of Courtenaye. At her family's castle both a minstrel and a phantomlike woman suggest that Paladour is the true heir to Courtenaye. The woman turns out to be Marie de Mortemar, who had supposedly been executed earlier for heresy. (At the time, she had cursed the Lord of Courtenaye, saying that a fiery arrow would level his towers.) The company at the castle also tell of the returning dead and of how a Courtenaye ancestress married a werewolf by mistake.
Meanwhile, Armirald, a sympathetic boy knight, is trying to reason the heretic Albigenses into good behavior and is falling in love with Genevieve, one of the heretics. In a confrontation between crusaders and Albigenses the latter
win, and as a result several things happen: Isabelle is snatched away by a black knight and put in a stronghold on a cliff; her old governess is put in a pit with a chained wolf; Sir Paladour is captured and finds a lycanthrope (who later bites him and gets thrown downstairs in retaliation) howling around his room. He discovers Isabelle's whereabouts by leading the lycanthrope to talk about lambs. Also as a result of the conflict Genevieve nurses Armirald, who is wounded, and begins to like him. Her people banish her for helping the enemy and she tries to get to Toulouse. On the way she saves the Queen from assassination. When she is kidnapped later, she shows the Queen's ring and is treated well. Some nobles, however, burn her house over her for refusing the Dauphin. Meanwhile Isabelle escapes with Paladour, but the latter is stabbed by Marie de Mortemar. Marie tells him that all his family were killed as heretics by the Lord of Courtenaye. She also tells him to kill his last enemy, Isabelle; this so upsets the couple that they commit double suicide.
Paladour discovers that Raymond of Toulouse is his father and Armirald his little brother. The Lord of Courtenaye is burned to death when some occult paraphernalia catch fire. Marie de Mortemar poisons some sacramental wine, which kills the wicked Bishop of Toulouse and causes communicants to die in droves. She jumps out a window to her death. Heroes and heroines rescue one another from their miscellaneous predicaments.