THE WILD IRISH BOY

Ormsby Bethel knows little or nothing of his own family until a letter from his natural father arrives with instructions for his education. When he goes to visit, he finds his father's household unpleasant despite the presence of his sister Sybilla, for the father is bad tempered and ill, and there is a fierce governess, Miss Percival. The governess, he learns at a ball some years later, is his father's mistress and mother to him and to Sybilla. In the aftermath of the revelation Ormsby's father is killed in a duel that Ormsby ought, perhaps, to have fought himself. He is next taken up by his uncle, an old Irish chieftain whom he has rescued from a strangler, and goes to London for a season of high life. Indeed his life there is so high that his uncle is imprisoned for his debts. The uncle is cross about this but recovers from his pique and arranges a surprise for Ormsby - a marriage to Athanasia Montolieu. Ormsby's pleasure is somewhat qualified by his being in love with Athanasia's mother, Lady Montrevors. However, he marries Athanasia and things seem to be going well. The pair are fond of each other and they inherit a fortune from Ormsby's uncle.
Further complications arise in London. Machinations against Ormsby are undertaken by his cousin Deloraine, who wants to ruin him, and Lady Delphina, who wants to buy him when his price goes down. Ormsby falls deeper and deeper into debt from gaming and finds himself in a labyrinth of scandal, bribes, hush-money, loans, and so on, the result of his having been seen with Lady Delphina under compromising circumstances. Athanasia is very kind to him and is glad to leave London, having herself narrowly avoided an affair with Deloraine. Meanwhile, Lady Montrevors's husband, who has long wanted to be rid of her, plans to divorce her for the affair that he believes her to be having with Ormsby. Fortunately for her he dies and his wife is unexpectedly restored to the only man she ever loved. This gentleman has appeared in various disguises throughout the story and is now revealed to be Ormsby's real father and the younger brother of Ormsby's supposed father; Miss Percival, Ormsby's mother, apparently had a busy girlhood. So, despite a number of other complications not mentioned here, the good end happily.