THE THREE BROTHERS. A ROMANCE

This plot is so complicated that it will be best to untangle it from the start. The sequence of events is not represented below, for much of the information is not revealed until the end of the novel. The three brothers are Arnaud (later known as Julian), Louis (usually known as Claudio), and Henri.
Arnaud/Julian. As a child Arnaud is much petted by his parents. He is the eldest. Despite a sadistic streak he is a general favorite, for he is attractive, quick-witted, and articulate. When he is eight he is wounded by banditti and taken hostage; the robbers try to nurse him, but when his parents recover him he is a cripple, hunchbacked. He goes home to find that his younger brother Louis has supplanted him as favorite. When the family moves to France he stabs Louis and tells his parents that his brother has gone on with the servants. Some time after their arrival in France, his father casts him and his mother off, for his mother is only a kept woman, previously an escaped nun, and the Marquis wishes to bring home his real wife and legitimate son Henri. Children perpetually jeer at Arnaud for his deformity, and later his misery is intensified by the discovery that the only girl who is nice to him, and whom he consequently loves, is his father's courtesan. At last Arnaud decides to pursue evil and makes an arrangement with Satan whereby he acquires a new, handsome body, having discarded the old one and left it in a cave. He is thereafter called Julian and appears in the narratives of the other two brothers.
Louis/Claudio. Claudio is found and raised by peasants, along with a nobleman's daughter named Camilla. Their foster father, a bandit, sells Claudio as a page to their neighbor Larina. Time passes. Camilla is kidnapped by pirates on her wedding day. Claudio joins the army and is captured by Henri, who makes friends with him and takes his prisoner home. (It is here that the novel begins.) Claudio and Henri spend the night in a house belong1ng to a frightening and apparently supernatural Cavalier, who is in fact Julian. Henri sees his own family crest on the bed­hangings. In the morning Henri is missing and Claudio is offered poison for breakfast but does not take it. Julian forces him to go to Genoa on some political errand by threatening that Henri's life will be forfeited if he does not. Later Claudio finds Camilla in a Moorish harem. He gets her out and brings her home and marries her, though it is fairly obvious that she does not at all dislike her foreign husband. Henri takes the couple in, but this domestic arrangement is not good, for he tries to seduce Cam1lla and she finally runs away, leaving the impression that she succumbed to him.
Henri. Henri's real adventures begin when he is imprisoned by Julian on his way home from the wars. His dungeon is in the house occupied by Larina, an associate of Julian's, and the woman for whom Claudio once worked as a page. Larina's current page, Laurian, loves his employer so much that he tries to poison Henri, whom he sees as competition. He is correct in his assessment, for Larina goes about seducing Henri with an efficiency that is striking even in a Gothic villainess. There is one remarkable scene in which she clamps him into a torture chair of some kind and sets about stirring him up. When Laurian's worst suspicions are realized, he hangs himself, and the guilty couple rather casually toss his body into the vault. (Claudio later has the misfortune to thrust his hand into Laurian's wormy chest cavity while he is hunting for Henri.) Henri discovers his father wasting away in another of the building's several dungeons. When, after various complications, Henri returns to society, he becomes more and more wicked, despite Claudio's hopes of reforming him. Besides being a libertine and a glutton, he grows violent and bloody and even cuts his dying father's head off with a sword.
Circumstances bring the three brothers together again near the end of the story. Julian is in so much trouble that he decides to resume his old body and identity on the one night when this deed may be done, but he needs fresh blood, a human sacrifice. Claudio falls into his hands and is taken to a cave. Actually, Julian appears to like Claudio a little and is almost hoping that someone will come by to interrupt his plan. The person who comes by is Henri, with an evil ecclesiastical confederate. When Claudio flees to his protection, announcing that they are brothers, Henri drags him back to the cave and shoots at him. Julian is glad to have Henri, whom he hates, in his hands and forces him to trample a crucifix before he kills him, as he wishes his legitimate brother not only to die but to go to hell. Claudio shoots at random and hits Julian, but the latter is not angry and joins Claudio in his flight from the cave. He is nursed by a priest to whom he confesses and is turned over to the Inquisition. They condemn him to the rack, but it is clear that only an ambulatory body is left when the morning of his execution arrives. To the disappointment of the audience, he does not even cry out, but there is a storm that knocks down buildings, and the scaffold and body burn together.
Claudio rediscovers Camilla, but their meeting is not a happy reunion. Camilla is a penniless wanderer and carries with her a black baby, child of her previous husband the Moor. The child was apparently a factor in her earlier departure from Henri's house. Claudio catches up with her just as the peasants decide to throw the black baby around to see if it can fly. It cannot, and lies in a mangled lump at Claudio's feet as he catches up Camilla in his arms. Pickersgill points out that anything further would be anticlimactic and stops the novel there, but several years later he adds a note that tries without great success to draw a moral from the story and adds that the strain of her vicissitudes was too much for Camilla, who was imbecile for the rest of her life. Claudio could get near her only by staining his face brown so that he looked like the Moor and he was too scrupulous to take sexual advantage of the illusion. Camilla lived on with him, celibate and feebleminded, and he supported them both by laboring in the Pyrenees.