ERNESTUS BERCHTOLD, OR, THE MODERN OEDIPUS. A TALE

Ernestus and his twin sister Julia have been raised by the priest Berchtold and Berchtold's married sister ever since their mother died in childbirth. Ernestus has learned to love heroism and public virtues but has little control over his private passions. One day a beautiful woman (Louisa), whom he meets by chance, inspires him to join the army, where he meets her brother Olivieri, has various adventures and close escapes, and gains popular fame. After Father Berchtold dies, Ernestus and Julia make their home with Olivieri's father, Filberto Doni. Olivieri proves to be a libertine, seducing Julia and leading Ernestus into deep gaming. His father appears a kind and virtuous old man but is involved in traffic with the occult; as we discover later, he can ask his supernatural affiliate for money or other forms of aid but for each favor gained must pay the price of some domestic loss or pain.
What with occultism and libertinism and seduction and gaming, the Doni household is increasingly troubled: Julia dies in childbirth; Olivieri is arrested as head of a band of robbers and is condemned to die; Louisa is dying of consumption, after nursing a man whom Ernestus wounded in a misguided quarrel. Despite her illness Louisa marries Ernestus and the couple experience a brief happiness. Then they decide to decorate their quarters with portraits of Louisa's father and Ernestus's mother, the latter newly painted from a miniature. They think that the portraits will surprise Louisa's father, as indeed they do, for he realizes that the woman is his lost wife and the Berchtold twins his own children. The final penalty exacted for his occult dealings is the knowledge that his children have committed double incest. He writes a confessional autobiography for Ernestus, supplying an account of the old man who bequeathed him the fatal secrets of occult procedure, and a description of the consequent chicanery and misunderstanding in which he has been involved. At the end of the novel, Ernestus, Louisa having died, is left a solitary penitent, nursing visions of reunion with her in paradise.