DON RAPHAEL. A ROMANCE

At the beginning of the story Don Lorenzo de Ferrara, in Madrid, is accosted by a strange girl, Agnes, who mistakes him for his friend Count Aranda, to whose protection she is running. Consequently Lorenzo is attacked by her father, whom he stabs in self-defense. Count Aranda is studying the Doctrine of Celestial Influences, as taught by a man he calls "little Mahmut." Lorenzo's history is given in some detail, but the adventure pertinent to subsequent developments has to do with the Castle of St. Helma, into which he and a friend once found their way. The castle was rich with mysterious figures, vapors, and so on, and possessed an especially striking room done all in black, with black candles. He and the friend found themselves clamped into chairs there and the friend's chair sank through the floor, while letters of fire spelled "Lorenzo" on the wall. The principal inhabitant of the castle was Don Raphael, an old man in a wizard suit, with a long white beard to his knees. He admitted that the supernatural effects were a ruse to ensure privacy. He had been living in isolation since he stabbed a cuckolding friend. Lorenzo discovered Don Raphael's best-kept secret, his daughter Cornelia, a girl so innocent as to be entirely ignorant of men. ("Can it speak?" she asked about Lorenzo.) At last Lorenzo accidentally stabbed Don Raphael, having thrust out for balance a hand with a dagger in it, and left the castle.
Later Cornelia appears in Lorenzo's life again and says that she has cured Don Raphael, who now wishes to marry her. Lorenzo is shocked, but innocent Cornelia assures him, "I have told him I would not have him, even if he was my father." She has discovered from some papers partially glimpsed that he is not. Don Raphael arrives and shoots her, apparently fatally. Lorenzo discovers that Christiana, a girl who looks like Cornelia and to whom he has earlier been attracted, is Cornelia's sister. When Cornelia suddenly turns up again, alive after all (though she and Agnes dress as specters; it is a scheme of the latter's to wean Count Aranda from the occult), Christiana is so discouraged that she decides to take the veil. But Cornelia, having been apprised of her own earlier, though innocent, indiscretions, takes a drug and dies. Lorenzo interrupts Christiana's veil-taking just in time and marries her.