VATHEK. AN ARABIAN TALE, FROM AN UNPUBLISHED MANUSCRIPT, WITH NOTES CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY

The Caliph Vathek, whose evil eye can kill with an angry glance and often does, has five special palaces, one for the gratification of each sense, but despite his passionate and self-indulgent nature his subjects seem to love him. One day a demonic stranger, a Giaour, arrives in the kingdom with a collection of magical knives, sabers, and slippers for sale. Vathek acquires, among other things, some sabers with inscriptions which change daily. That the inscriptions are undecipherable except by one old man does nothing to improve Vathek's disposition; he falls ill with frustration and is obliged to drink enormous quantities of cold water.
The Giaour, who has reappeared to cure Vathek on the one hand and to torment him on the other, promises at last to take the Caliph to the Palace of Subterranean Fire on condition that he adore the terrestrial influences and abjure Mahomet. Pleased with the bargain, Vathek throws the hungry Giaour the fifty most beautiful little boys in the kingdom, and when some of his subjects later forgive and attempt to rescue him from a fire (a magical one, of his mother's devising), he offers them up as well.
Vathek sets off for the Palace of Subterranean Fire with an uncommonly splendid retinue but is soon exposed to bad weather, wild animals, and forest fire. Parched, in the midst of a wasteland, his entourage fairly annihilated, he decides to ignore the Giaour's edict not to enter any habitation. Soon Vathek and Nouronihar, his host's beautiful daughter, are mutually attracted despite Nouronihar's engagement to and love for her soft and babyish cousin Gulchenrouz. She too is eager to see the treasures of the subterranean Palace and despite her father's efforts to stop her - he drugs her, carries her away, and persuades her she has died - she leaves home to revel with Vathek in delights of sensuality. At last, after some goading by his mother and some attempt by benevolent supernaturals to make him change his mind, the Caliph comes with Nouronihar to his destination. There they meet Eblis, see the treasures of the Pre-adamite Sultans, and encounter Soliman Ben Daoud himself, but they are unnerved to find all the inhabitants of the Palace pressing their right hands over their unquenchably burning hearts. In the few days remaining before their own hearts catch fire they wander apatheticallv hand-in-hand through the treasures that once tempted them to make their journey, but even their companionship at last gives way to the agony of their flaming hearts and they begin to hate each other.
Vathek's witch mother Carathis, whom he summons in order to berate her for his upbringing, is obliged to stay in the halls of Eblis and burn with the others. As for Nouronihar's cousin Gulchenrouz, he was earlier rescued (from Carathis, who wished to sacrifice him) by the benevolent Genius and is leading a happy life in a magically protected land of never-ending childhood, as are the fifty little boys whom we supposed the Gaiour to have eaten.