ROSALVIVA, OR, THE DEMON DWARF. A ROMANCE

Leontini loves Viola di Morini, but she marries someone else. On the rebound he becomes involved with Rosalviva, who suffers from vanity but appears at first to have some good qualities. She abandons Leontini for his friend the Conte Golfieri. Golfieri and Rosalviva are two of a kind. We discover that Golfieri assassinated Rosalviva's father, which is awkward as Rosalviva has made a vow to avenge her father's death. She overlooks the vow for the sake of her love, though a priest assures her that she will be damned if she does not keep her promise. Leontini, who plans to take revenge for Rosalviva's infidelity, is imprisoned by Golfieri.
Golfieri takes Rosalviva to see the fun of Leontini's execution, but their victim somehow escapes. Romantic complications develop as Golfieri's adoptive father insists that he marry a woman named Francesca, and the priest Vivaldi (who is also Leontini's father) pressures Rosalviva about her vow. Golfieri solves the latter problem by strangling Vivaldi. Rosalviva deliberately chooses the love of Golfieri rather than the love of God, but because the marriage with Francesca does indeed take place, she fears that she will only be Golfieri's mistress. Therefore she tries to blackmail him into killing his wife.
At this point a character known as the Demon Dwarf appears and reminds Golfieri of his first murder; he claims kinship with Leontini. He and Rosalviva become associates and at last he consents to kill Francesca and move her body to Rosalviva's own vaults so she can enjoy the sight of it, but on condition that Rosalviva belong to him. Rosalviva hopes to win back Golfieri, but he has repented and is mourning his wife; this makes Rosalviva so angry that she decides to lock him up with the decaying body of his wife and hang him later. Suddenly the Dwarf reveals that he is really Leontini and that Francesca is not dead. Rosalviva, stunned and terrified, commits suicide. Leontini marries his first love, Viola.