FLEETWOOD, OR, THE NEW MAN OF FEELING

Casimir Fleetwood, the protagonist and narrator, says that the story is a record of his errors. He is an only child, raised in an isolated part of Wales by his widowed father and a capable tutor. Sensitive to the beauties of nature, he is given to reverie and daydreaming. (Later he believes that daydreaming leads to despotism because the dreamer's control of events is absolute.) "Positive, assuming, and self-conceited" is his description of his youthful character. At Oxford he takes up worldliness and permits the development of his passions, though he is relatively kind to beleaguered Freshmen, including one who kills himself after being persuaded to read aloud his verse tragedy about the hygienic problems of the Augean stables.
After Oxford, Fleetwood travels on the continent and has love affairs with two promiscuous and unsuitable women. In Switzerland he finds his father's friend and foster brother William Ruffigny, at whose house Fleetwood learns that his father has died in Wales and goes home to mourn. Ruffigny manages to save him from a third love affair, but the reformed Fleetwood is cynical and misanthropic.
Fortyish now and devoured with ennui, Fleetwood travels restlessly and longs for a real friend. One day he hears of a man named Macneil, a friend of Rousseau's, and wrangles a meeting. The Macneils and their three charming daughters lead a rather private existence because of a misguided elopement in Mrs. Macneil's early life, but they take Fleetwood into their family circle. Macneil tries to convince him that he should marry and start a family, though, knowing Fleetwood's disposition, he is a little daunted to see him looking with partiality at Mary, the youngest of the daughters. At last all the Macneils except Mary, who stayed in England to visit a friend, are shipwrecked and die on their way to Italy. From a combination of oversight on Macneil's part and skullduggery on the part of a Genoese banker, Mary is left penniless. Only the economic challenge of her situation keeps her from pining away. She marries Fleetwood, who has been her only consolation through her troubles, and prepares for a happy ending.
Alas, Fleetwood is ill suited to marriage. Mary annoys him by usurping his favorite spots in the family home, by wishing to socialize, and by raising other innocent conflicts of interest. He picks quarrels and becomes jealous; she pines. When he takes her to Bath for her health they become involved with two of Fleetwood's kinsmen, Gifford and Kenrick. They are the sons of a loose but engaging woman whose shenanigans led to the illegitimizing of Gifford, her elder boy, who has been an accomplished villain since his childhood. He persuades Fleetwood, through a complicated intrigue of circumstantial evidence, forgeries, and so on, that Kenrick and Mary are in love and that all the world gossips about them. Fleetwood accuses Mary and, half insane, dashes off to the continent, leaving orders to have Mary evicted penniless and divorced, and their baby declared illegitimate. His lunacy climaxes on his wedding anniversary, when for celebration he has waxwork figures made of Mary and Kenrick, dresses them in suitable clothing, plays their favorite tune on a barrel organ, and at last, imagining that he sees them move, tears them to pieces. When he recovers from the illness which this scene precipitates he goes to Paris to meet Gifford but on the way suffers from an attempted assassination. When he recovers, his l1fe is turned upside down, for he learns that Kenrick has rescued him and that the villain Gifford is in the Bastille. Scarborough, the old neighbor who has taken him in, explains that the apparently incriminating exchanges between Kenrick and Mary had to do with his own daughter Louisa, who wishes to marry Kenrick despite her father's despotical intervention on behalf of the ugly, imbecilic, and effeminate Lord Lindsey. Kenrick at last wins Scarborough over. Fleetwood sees the error of his ways and gives up nearly all his fortune to Mary and the baby (which incidentally looks unmistakably like him), planning to retire to the Pyrenees. At the end, however, Mary unexpectedly forgives him and they are reunited. Kenrick marries Louisa and Gifford is executed.