THINGS AS THEY ARE, OR, THE ADVENTURES OF CALEB WILLIAMS

Caleb Williams, who has been brought up to be honest, is employed as secretary/librarian to Mr. Falkland. Williams is young (only eighteen), greatly admires his employer, and is by nature obsessively curious. His employer, sometimes reclusive and unsmiling, sometimes outright frenzied, is said to be a mere ruin of the man he once was. Falkland's story, as Williams is told it by a third party, accounts for his melancholy: he was once accused of murder. The victim was a squire named Tyrrel, a man of rough passions and no breeding. Tyrrel and Falkland fell into a kind of social rivalry in which Falkland's sophistication outshone Tyrrel's wealth. Growing jealousy of his rival turned Tyrrel savage toward his dependent cousin Emily, who admired Falkland. At her refusal to marry a particularly uncouth farmer named Grimes, to whom he had perversely betrothed her, he had her imprisoned for debt and thus precipitated her death. Knowing himself despised by the whole town and goaded by Falkland's reproach at a public gathering, Tyrrel got drunk, came back to the gathering, and knocked Falkland down. Falkland was wild with humiliation and Tyrrel was later found dead in the street. A poor farmer and his son, whom Tyrrel had formerly persecuted and Falkland tried to help, were convicted of the murder and executed, but the change in Falkland's character began then.
It occurs to Williams that his employer may in fact be guilty. He finds himself unable to leave murder and related topics out of his conversation and watches Falkland closely. The relationship becomes tense and embarrassing. Then one day Falkland finds Williams breaking into a trunk of his. After that he swears his secretary to silence and admits to the murder of Tyrrel, but he asserts that Williams has sold himself for the information. Soon Williams, chafing at the closeness of Falkland's supervision and at the prospect of never being free, runs away. Falkland pursues and accuses him of robbery. When Williams escapes from prison he falls in with some bandits who refrain from turning him in for the bounty Falkland has put on his head, but leaves them after the woman of the house tries to kill him with a cleaver. He attempts to sail to Ireland disguised as a beggar but is taken off the ship, suspected of some crime committed by an Irishman. He wears various disguises, keeps moving, writes for a living. Always he is hunted and execrated. When at last he is captured he decides to reveal Falkland's guilt. Regretting this decision when Falkland, clearly a broken man, enters the courtroom, Williams makes a long speech in which he blames himself and praises Falkland's virtues. Falkland, uttering reciprocal sentiments, falls into his arms and dies three days later.