THE ALGERINES, OR, THE TWINS OF NAPLES

Vicenza is the father of twin girls, who were born under unfortunate circumstances. Jealous at the attention paid his wife by a man named Castelli, he gave his rival a crippling wound and moved his wife to Naples. When she died in childbirth, partly as a result of travel and emotional upheaval, he gave the elder twin, Alphonsine, to a convent in expiation. He has raised Victoria himself and is outraged to discover when she grows up that she has a secret romantic relationship with Castelli's son Caesario. He is informed of this by Zacherelli, a servant turned bandit. Vicenza removes his daughter to Naples, but Caesario finds this out and follows. Disillusioned with Victoria, Vincenza begins visiting Alphonsine in the convent and wondering whether he has incarcerated the wrong twin. When Caesario gets into Victoria's room with a rope ladder, he is sure of it and persuades the abbess to trade daughters, since Alphonsine has not yet taken her vows.
Also in Naples is the Algerine Abdallah, whose father was Aghar Hussein and whose mother a captured army wife who later ran away (and later yet, we discover, became the abbess mentioned above). Looking for a woman to marry, Abdallah spends some time sending notes of introduction to Victoria. He believes himself particularly eligible because of an arrangement he made at home with a demon called Himmalay, who is visible only on mountains; it permits him to grant prolongation of life to three people of his choice. When Caesario is wounded by Zacherelli, Abdallah finds him and nurses him, and they become friends. One night when Abdallah is drunk - he is unaccustomed to alcohol - he responds to the delirious and apparently terminal mumbles of Caesario ("Save me") by giving him one of his charmed lives. Caesario recovers and Abdallah learns that he is competing for Victoria but behaves gallantly. Vicenza is so angry at Caesario's recovery that he stabs Zacherelli for incompetence, and Zacherelli extorts the second of Abdallah's charmed lives by having his bandits hold the Algerine over the edge of a precipice.
Meanwhile Vicenza has secretly swapped daughters, and Alphonsine is having what she regards as an exciting time in the seclusion of the family home. But she is a little confused by the young men - Caesario and Lioni, the latter a rejected suitor of Victoria's - who, mistaking her for Victoria, come to her balcony and say passionate and heartbroken things; her previous training has not equipped her to deal with this situation. She rather prefers Lioni, who is more polite. Hoping it will cure her father's depression over Victoria, she persuades him to take her to Palermo, but on the way they are captured by Zacherelli and his bandits, who have secured Caesario as well. They want a ransom for Caesario but plan to kill Vicenza and give Alphonsine to one of the younger bandits. Rather than pay the ransom, Caesario's father goes to the Viceroy and asks for soldiers. Abdallah, who has found his old friend Haly and bought him from a planter, comes to visit just in time to join the rescue party. When, in the fracas at the bandit's quarters, Abdallah comes face to face with Zacherelli, the bandit assumes that stabbing such a magical man would be futile; Haly is so pleased that he gives Zacherelli a turban to disguise his escape. He is especially pleased since he himself was Himmalay, playing a joke on his friend, and he has been feeling sorry.
At the convent Victoria has politely but firmly declined to take her vows. She is delighted when Caesario arrives with a note from the now reconciled Vicenza, asking for her release. Lioni finds that he is very fond of Alphonsine. And when Abdallah discovers in the abbess Rosalie his runaway mother, he converts and marr1es Victoria's convent friend Ebba, who had been driven to the religious life by unrequited love for Lioni. Zacherelli comes once to beg for money to leave Sicily. Vicenza and Castelli never learn to like each other despite the marriage of their children.