THE DAGGER

The Baron St**, who is attractive and knows it, is married by his family to Albertina of F**· She is not only beautiful but intelligent and virtuous; she loves the Baron very much because it is her duty to do so, and tries to make him cultivate his mind and character. Although a fairly willing pupil, he is not a ready one and, when he is appointed ambassador, goes to court unprepared to deal with knavery and temptation. There are three ruthless and contending parties at court - the Prince's, the Princess's, and Julia's. Julia is the Prince's mistress. The Baron and Julia promptly fall in love, and he, being young and ardent, becomes conspicuously foolish. Meanwhile Albertina is doing her best to keep her husband out of trouble. She even goes to see Julia, and the two women like each other so much that Julia, who is tiring of the Baron anyway, promises to give him up. The Baron, beside himself with rage and loss, impulsively poisons Albertina's lemonade, but then he and Albertina, overcome respectively with guilt and nobility, each try to drink the mixture and break the glass in the struggle. After that he leaves Julia for a while, only to be taken up by the Princess, who has been waiting for her chance. Later Julia tries to stab the Baron, an attempt that leads not to his death but to their reconciliation. Just as she is giving him a hair ring as a pledge of love, a hand reaches down and takes it; the hand is Albertina's and she puts the ring on her finger, saying that she wants to be included in the bond of their love. There is hugging all around, and the others greatly admire her.
The Baron, out of sentimentality, has kept the dagger with which Julia tried to kill him; Julia, however, wants it back, it having been a gift to her from the Prince, who may ask where it is. When the Baron brings it back to Julia, hidden in his bosom, her dog (not for the first time) bites him, and in bending over to deal with the attack he accidentally stabs himself in the stomach. The Prince now being better informed about Julia's affairs than is healthy for her she decides to emigrate. The Baron refuses to go with her, so she uses the dagger to force him into a carriage and abduct him. At dawn Albertina, who waited up all night after she heard her husband go out, goes to Julia's rooms and finds them empty of all save confusion and the Baron's hat. Albertina stays faithful, dangles the Prince, who is now pursuing her, and hopes to recover the Baron. He is in fact becoming very bored indeed in his rural hideaway, and Julia in consequence is once again becoming dangerous. One day a hermit (Albertina in disguise) prevents Julia from stabbing him, whereupon she stabs herself and dies asking forgiveness. She has left Albertina her whole estate. The reunited couple leave court life and go home, where the Baron learns to find happiness in tranquillity.