THE ABBESS. A ROMANCE

Maddalena Rosa, daughter of the Duca Bertocci, is a convent boarder at Santa-Maria del Nova at Florence. There she is seen and loved by the Conte Marcello Porta, a young man who has come to observe a religious ceremony and have a look at the nuns. He in turn is watched by the grim Padre Ubaldo, who demands a midnight meeting. After some interruptions and delays Ubaldo exacts from Marcello a vow of silence about the identity of the woman whom he will be taken to see. The young man persuades himself that he is going to Maddalena, but, after an exchange of declarations with a veiled seductress in a sensuous convent hideaway, he discovers that his partner is the abbess herself, Vittoria Bracciano. Altogether unscrupulous, malicious, and licentious, she is friends only with Beatrice, a nun who was put into the convent after the mysterious and sinister disappearance of a man who had rejected her. Because Marcello perceives the abbess to be bloodthirsty and jealous, he is obliged to dissemble his surprise in order to protect Maddalena. At their next meeting the abbess drugs his wine and seduces him.
In the meantime, Maddalena's dearest convent friend Marietta has died, leaving Maddalena a gold crucifix and a suggestion that her spirit may hover nearby at midnight. Grief and distraction lead Maddalena to sleepwalk to the room in which Marietta had been laid out, a room into which Marcello blunders as he leaves the scene of his seduction. Ubaldo and the abbess discover the pair together and begin to plot their destruction. Accusing her of letting a man into the convent, the abbess evicts Maddalena and persuades Bertocci to send his daughter to a certain family castle where the conspirators know that they will have access to her.
Marcello follows Maddalena to the castle, whence they are both removed by the Inquisition at the end of the second volume. Maddalena's father follows in a bootless attempt to see his daughter and is extricated from the prisons of the Inquisition by a mysterious youth who had earlier tried to kill him. The youth is Don Giuseppe Cazini, an innately virtuous young man who was educated by his natural father to vice and has promised to take revenge on Bertocci for a purported wrong against his family. In fact, he is Bertocci's own son, Maddalena's twin brother who was said to have died in infancy. He has been raised by Ubaldo's brother, one of the story's principal villains. The accusations that Ubaldo and the abbess have brought against Marcello and Maddalena could all be dissolved by the breaking of Marcello's promise of silence, but both of them so value the integrity of his word that they survive torture and threats of torture without breaking. Thanks to a sudden confession from the abbess's confederate Beatrice, accusations are brought in turn against the accusers, who at last betray themselves. Retribution is lurid and just - burning, lifelong penitence and flagellation, murder in the midst of trial. The attachment of Marcello and Maddalena is sanctioned by parental consent.