RIMAULDO, OR, THE CASTLE OF BADAJOS

The Conde Don Rimauldo is leaving his ancestral home, the Castillio del Lara, to go to court. Being a sensitive young man who will spend much of the novel in contemplation of God and Nature, Rimauldo is hesitant and emotional about leaving. His father, made of sterner stuff, is annoyed at his weakness. On his way to the king, Rimauldo acquires Cesario, a peasant who is mourning a dead wife; later, when Cesario saves him from assassination at an inn, Rimauldo promotes him to secretary. At court there is a man - the Marques Diego de Badajos, sixty, gloomy, and proud - for whom Rimauldo conceives an instant antipathy, and who seems to be watching him. Further acquaintance suggests that Badajos is in cahoots with a sinister monk, Sebastiane, who is known to the local peasants as Father Benito. Rimauldo hears them talking about Constanza, a beautiful and mysterious woman with whom he is increasingly in love. She seems to be troubled, sorrowful, and somewhat inaccessible; once when he goes in secret to watch her pray he sees before she arrives a phantom who looks as Constanza would if she were dead and bloodied. The relationship is further complicated by angry letters from his father, who says first that he has spies watching for unauthorized relationships and, later, that Constanza is a whore (he has been misinformed) and that Cesario should be killed for his part in their meetings. In fact, Rimauldo's father is raving and talking of filicide despite the soothing attempted by Rimauldo's mother, who finally takes to her bed from sheer strain. Sebastiane tries to stab Rimauldo - Cesario prevents it - and carries Constanza away. Rimauldo has no sooner rescued her than his own father takes her away from him and carries her off again, this time to be locked up in the Castillio del Lara en route to another convent. Rimauldo wheedles a nocturnal meeting with his mother, who still loves him but will not tell him about Constanza. Rimauldo's father throws him out of the castle but is beginning to be impressed by Constanza's goodness and to wonder if he has been mistaken. It turns out that Constanza is not, as we were led to believe, Sebastiane's child, but has a pedigree sufficient to reconcile Rimauldo's parents to her as a daughter-in-law.
Cesario, too, discovers that he has noble blood. Although raised by robbers who accidentally retained him in the excitement of assaults and hostages, he is the proper heir to the Montalvan estates. When he is imprisoned by Badajos he finds a manuscript and some mementos which incriminate his jailer. Badajos killed the brother of his own unwilling wife, supposing him to be not brother but lover, after which some confusion and transportation of infants ensued. Cesario and Badajos are both horrified at the increasing likelihood that they are father and son. At last Cesario recovers from the melancholy into which the idea has thrown him and becomes the new Duca di Montalvan, Badajos having killed himself.