ITALIAN MYSTERIES, OR, MORE SECRETS THAN ONE. A ROMANCE

Valeria Urbina's father is a physician in Venice; he has raised a friendless orphan, Paulina, as her sister. Her mother and brother are dead, the latter having been killed in a duel. One night when Urbino goes out on a sick call he is kidnapped by some people who want him to bleed a woman to death. When he refuses he is told to leave Venice on threat of death. Consequently the family departs for the Castello della Torvida, which belonged to Valeria's mother and is erroneously supposed to be haunted. At the castle, Valeria receives a message from Julio, to whom she was once attracted at a masked ball, and meets him at a recluse's hut. The recluse turns out to be Julio himself, who tells Valeria the story of his life. He was left an infant at a monastery, equipped with a cameo brooch which he was supposed to wear upon reaching puberty, and a note telling him to be careful whom he marries because he has a sister somewhere. One night after he was grown he was taken to meet a beautiful woman, who, seeing his brooch, shrieked and fainted and sent him away. He found upon awakening from a drugged sleep that she had hung a miniature around his neck, with an accompanying note that suggested she was his mother. A couple of years later an acquaintance invited him to see the dissection of a beautiful courtesan. It was the same woman. Feeling that his mother had been dishonored, he challenged and killed the man who invited him. His victim turns out to have been Valeria's brother.
Paulina, meanwhile, is kidnapped by Alberto de Valdetti, who gives her a marriage contract to sign. She receives as much support as possible from the kidnapper's nephew Vincentia, who also loves her, and from Lipardo, the majordomo. Under increasing pressure from her captor, she reluctantly consents to a secret wedding to Vincentia. This escape is cut off by the mid-wedding arrival of Valdetti, who attacks his nephew. The servant tears open Paulina's dress to reveal two scars near her neck. Valdetti faints. Small wonder, for these wounds, we are later informed, were inflicted by Valdetti himself on his infant niece whom he acc1dentally nicked in the process of stabbing her mother, who was his sister-in-law and a woman he once loved himself. Other relationships are revealed and clarified.  A pilgrim arrives and admits that he is Claudio Valdetti, the real marchese, the elder of twin brothers. Further, he is father to both Julio and Paulina, who have never suspected that they are siblings. (Paulina had been left to her foster father by a woman whom he treated for a stab-wound. The woman was Claudio's wife Camilla.) Claudio had gone into hiding after being falsely accused of his wife's murder. In fact she was not murdered, though her brother-in-law did his best; nor was she the dissected courtesan on the operating table. That was her sister Antonia; Julio misunderstood the note. Camilla herself, who is alive and a nun, arrives to complete the reunion. Vincentia is identified as the son of Lipardo, Claudio's dearest friend. He and Paulina evidently consider themselves married, despite the interruption of the cere-mony. Julio and Valeria feel that it would not be right for them to marry, since he has killed her brother, so he goes into a monastery and she is happy in having done her duty.