A WINTER'S TALE

Edward the Black Prince is attracted to a girl whom he meets at a tournament, but as her social rank is lower than his he tries to overcome this inclination. The girl, Selina, is an orphan living with a distant relative, the Earl of Ilford. (Ilford has been given the title and residence that formerly belonged to Selina's father, who was banished for insurrection.) Invited to Ilford's house, the Prince is frustrated by Selina's absence from festivities and stirred by secret doors and gliding figures in the picture gallery, wh1ch contains a portrait of Selina's mother. At last the Prince finds Selina in her room, in which the Earl has requested her to remain. After a number of nocturnal visits, which Selina and the Prince fondly regard as merely friendly, they are undone by their reciprocal passion. The Prince is distressed that his position does not permit him to claim her, and Selina is distraught by her own turpitude. His attempt to marry her secretly is interrupted by the ghost of Selina's mother. They have been warned, too, by the articulate and levitating armor of Selina's father, which threatens them with death if they meet again, and by a dream of the Prince's in which Selina's mother comes out of her coffin and leads him to Selina lying on a bed with a dead child turning green on her bosom. Selina is, in fact, pregnant and later writes to the Prince to tell him so.
Selina has additional troubles in the Ilford household. Lady Ilford, after receiving a somewhat obscure warning from a wild woman in the forest, is murdered by her husband, who hopes to possess Selina himself. His son Lord Desmond nourishes similar desires and has once drunkenly tried to rape her. Her baby is delivered in secrecy while the Black Prince paces in an anteroom; he has continued to provide moral support even though the relationship has been chaste since the night of the child's conception. The Earl, after unwittingly stabbing his own son, whom he perceived merely as someone trying to rape Selina (Desmond's second such attempt), is more than ever determined to have her. He locks her up to consider his marriage proposal. A good priest helps her escape with her baby to France, where they cross battlefields to get to the Prince's army. She is captured en route by Sir Emeric, Ilford's old friend. The Earl of Ilford arrives later and they lock her in a dungeon, hoping that she will do anything to move the baby into a healthier place. Sir Emeric has decided to betray his town to the French army, and in the resulting fracas (the English win) Selina is rescued by her father, who was in the dungeon just above hers. Ilford is killed and Emeric captured. Selina's father is upset about his daughter's illegitimate child but forgives her.