THE UNKNOWN, OR, THE NORTHERN GALLERY. A ROMANCE

Eleonora is Bishop Hugh Latimer's daughter, or so we suppose. She has formed a secret acquaintance with an unknown man in some kind of mysterious trouble and fears that an unidentified body found on the premises may be his. When she goes in secret to look at the corpse she is frightened away by a mysterious figure and a sharp noise of clapping. She finds a note from someone anonymous who informs her that the sound of three claps will announce his presence. Later, when her father goes to the tower and she asks who will protect her, she hears the claps again. The reader is expected to believe, as Eleonora does, that the Unknown is the man with whom she is already acquainted. In fact, though evidence changes from pro to con and back again, her acquaintance is apparently Percival Godolphin, who helped to put Lady Jane Grey on the throne. Eleonora's grandmother dies not long after Latimer goes to the tower, so Eleonora is sent for protection to Lady Blunt and Sir Sigismund, whose family includes three young men: Sir Hildebrand, surly and tyrannical; Valentine, said to be insane and kept in a tower; Lord Henry Fitzroy, illegitimate son of Henry VIII and Sir Sigismund's former wife.
Sir Hildebrand, whose proposal Eleonora has refused, wishes to kill his elder brother Valentine. When he tries, Eleonora throws herself between them and is stabbed in the shoulder. Believing her to be in love with Valentine, Sir Sigismund warns her that the young man is her brother: he was so eager for an heir that he kidnapped little Valentine from the Latimers and, when his own son was subsequently born, declared his purloined heir insane; this seemed the best solution to an awkward situation. Eleonora intends in fact to marry Henry Fitzroy, but his spectral mother cancels the wedding by appearing to Henry and announcing that he and Eleonora are siblings. At about the same tlme, Sir Hildebrand attacks Henry's castle, where Edward VI is purportedly hidden, in the course of which he blows up his own mother with a shell. (Actually, the refugee is not Edward VI; Henry has been imposed upon.) The information from the ghost of Henry's mother was accurate; she is the ghost of Eleonora's mother as well, and Sir Sigismund is Eleonora's father. Eleonora was somehow given to the Latimers to replace the kidnapped Valentine. Godolphin, Eleonora's Unknown, is guilty of various crimes including joining a band of robbers and poisoning his wife. Valentine is released and marries Eleonora.