Introduction
After a deceptively modest beginning in the 17605, Gothic
fiction had by the nineties acquired such vigor and momentum
as to carry it three decades into the nineteenth century.
What we now rather loosely describe as Gothic motifs and
plots invaded the brief literary sketch and the five-volume
novel, the chapbook and Dr. Nathan Drake's Literary Hours,
drama and verse. Gothicism crept into the libraries of men
of letters (Wordsworth anathatized the novels and Cole-
ridge reviewed them), into the heads of the coming genera-
tion (Macaulay and Thackery seem never quite to have lost
the taste), and, judging by a fine shadow-toy of the Bleed-
ing Nun which I have had the privilege of admiring, into the
toy—cupboards. Gothics and quasi-Gothics were written by
men and women who were also writing opera, history, biogra-
phy, scientific papers, Shakespearean forgeries, treatises
on beekeeping, sermons, newspaper reports, literary criti-
cism, poetry, recollections of §yron, political observa-
tions, and topographical works.‘ Greats, near—greats, and
friends of greats tried their hands at various forms of the
Gothic; writers of ordinary if not exceptional merit flooded
the market with it. It was written tongue in cheek and it
was written tear in eye.’Y It came studded with travelogues,
interspersed with poetry, quivering with sensibility, dark
with Romantic gloom, clad in fancy dress, dripping gore, —
bellished with piety or sensuality, and framed with asser-
tions that it had been found on crumbling manuscripts. Most
Of all, it came in enormous quantities and we may presume
that it was sold and read in analogous quantities, though
the popularity of traveling libraries would suggest more
readers than sales.
Nowadays there seem to be three critical questions most
Often asked about the Gothic novel. Where did it come from’!
What caused its ergence? How does it behave? The first
question seems to me not very interesting, though curiosity
On that score is understandable, given the rather flashy na-
ture of the Gothic phenomenon. Literary historians have
mqunmlmmww

ml.
in \
been prone in general to see Gothic precursors in Smollett's The world represented in Gothic fictifm is ¢h_3T;'a‘1'5e1'i-zed
Ferdinand Count Fathom and Leland's Longswotd. They have . mi,it@ _@d.the-wmonltivﬂ °f
observed in the Graveyard school tastes and preoccupations bY a  but'nn1den£ifie1Tdisaster.) In this world, aPPea1"
compatible to the development of the Gothic and have noted 1-mpg" En: déﬁtly though net consistently, defleives the “‘i“d
the influence of Erench romances and of German Ritter-, ances rsgnses f;1ter and fail, and the passions overwhelm.
Rauber-, und Schauerromane. And t th G and the ' '
ye e erman novels that tars natural and supernatural, assault in impenetrable
appear in translation among the English — Horrid Mysteries Temp ’ d d t’ Nobod is en-
. ci itating ruin an amna ion. _Y
and Necromancer of the Black Forest, for instance — Seem d‘sg‘fis::§e‘-Jrltiotging is secure. The Gothic world is quin-
oddly fragmentary quite a different bre d f f tire y '
e 0 iction from 11 th fallen world the vision of fallen man,
the complicated but smoothly resolved novels of such writers tessentia y e , f h'
. - 5 d alienation, ‘haunted by images _° e 15
as W. C. Green, Curties, Ireland, Stanhope, and Pickersgill- 1i";‘.‘§ gﬁpuiziozf by itsqféljeg-dussions, and by alfawareness
As for precursors where do we sto " C Wt 1
, p. ertainly some of the f his unavoidable wretghedness. Further, it is a fallen.
novels, besides appearing to owe their attractive villains ° d h
li l without hope. Robert Kiel)’ has “°te '3 15
to Milton and their comic servants to Shakespeare, are, in ‘mrliegzszssarai it appears in Maturinvs Melmoth the wander-
devices of plot more like Reven Tr d h "ope ’
’ ge age y t an anything as a peculiarity of the author's theol0gY»1 b“t_the
else. And how, in any case, are we to trace the ancestry of er’ k
The mista es
s seems to be far more pervasive-
such a P3SC1.ChE of historical, sentimental, and horrific as hopelessnesf m r%c€itude resulting fromrvarious weaknesses
"Gothic novel" su ests" I l and lapses to
gg am we l content for these ques— and temptations become enormously important in a context
tions to refer the reader to such stalwarts as Birkhead
, . hi fi ti n which generally neglects to diSCUS5
Railo, Summers and Varma. llke Got C g 0 '
’ . atonement. llfotr" is this omission ‘surPﬁ-Sing! 5-“s°€ar as d
The second question — What caused its emergence’? — in— h min
. _ itin like poetry may tap t e unconscious _
terests me very much indeed, for the answer to that might n;m:::ew:§ter,g];an|s fallen Qtate is 3 circumstance 111 Whllih
tell us as well why the last fiftee to t t 0 ’ '
n "En Y Years have tici ates whether he wishes to or not. and
witnessed a similar phenomenon. But I do not pretend to everyone par P d'ff l ' i those
t he identifies his i icu t1eS I1
know the answer, and nothing so far has led me to believe tlﬁer gzdzgption, in the theological senSe, 119693195 Part
that anyone else knows it either. P rh ' '
e 3P5 5<'-‘me da)’ 3 P5?‘ of the human condition only for the individual who chooses
chologist-cum-historian with a grasp of philosophy and an f h
C C
_ _ to participate in 1:, Therefore we may say that o e lwo
unusual knowledge of the early Gothic novel will tell us circumstances, the fallen cnndition is the NOTE universa
why people at a articular ' i hi
p point n story need to frighten and the more deeply imbedded in the mind;. it provides the
themselves in a particular way, and precisely what circum— '
Gothic nightmare, from which some sort of redemP'51°“ may
stances trigger a need for the Gothic's peculiar titilla- or may not provide an awakening. N
tions. Until then, we had better go on to the third ques— A Particular qualifI|.CatiDn in my use of "fallen world
tion — How does it behave? —‘for this one is both interest- is advisable‘ protagonists in the throes Of Colwelltrated
ing and possible to answer in some detail.
ld
_ _ _ . Gothicism would be only too glad to enter a workaday wor
Gothic fiction has suffered a little, I think from a f 11
’ that would promise some kind of stabilit)', h°"'e"er 3 en
tendency on the part of scholars to treat it as a curiosity- and corrupt In the world as we know it, theological prob-
Curious it may be but one misses a reat d l f l
- 8 ea ° 3 "°"e 1 1; f tabl deferred for deathbed consideration;
by standing too far away from it. For this reason Robert ems may e com or y
ch z al both beneficent and malevolent, is BX‘
Kiely's The Romantic Novel in England (Cambridge, Mas e superna ur -, '
5- 1 it place i.e. in the background. The
1972), which talks about such novels as The Honk and Melmoth :i:E::,f::;t:t:¥ :28 film, State are, on a day-to—day basis,
the Wanderer from the inside, as though they were perfectly not very dl-anat1e_ In the Gothic world, on the other hand,
ordinary books, has always seemed to me to contai ll
Tl "T"-‘Sui Y eh 1 i likely to thrust itself into the fore-
valuable observations. These introductory remarks there- e supernatura S ' d
’ d d dema d immediate attention. Such occasions 0
fore, will deal with the view from inside the novels. I gzzugerjllit deferrfment of questions about good and evil, the
have not discriminated for my generalizations h b ‘ '
ere etwee“ huma d't‘on death and damnation. Rather, 3" immedl-ate
"terror" and "horror" Gothic, or between those and the his- n con 1 1 ’ v
_ - and correct understanding of these problems becomes crucial.
torical or sentimental Gothic, or any combinations thereof‘
' Even in the more conservative fiction, the Gothic world 1S
rather, I have tried to discover what viewpoint, if any, all characterized by the concentration and magnification of
novels called "Gothic" might share. _ fears and problems inherent in the "normal" world. /
mmmmzmmmm @m@3mw

L2" \
One of the most cons icuous traits that identif in obsession with P‘-"1'~'°facti°“’ ch°“gh
Gothic world as fallen 1: the physical environment} :2‘!-;!— But giilhslszpfgythi Gothic novel, does suggest an interest
tings typical of the Gothic novel may be sufficiently famil not,-leach as something more than a lurid plot device. That
L“ from Eino Rai1°'s study The Haunted c"stle- The deS°' in e in The Monk in which Agnes Puts her hand on a squash)’
lation of the Gothic _scene is striking. Castles that Pie‘ scenct and discovers it to be the head of a dead nun is more
sumably once offered warmth, revelry, or at least security, objiesentative than one might like to think. For comments
stand EWPEY and ruined, Providing instead baffling passage— repthe burial and decomposition of parents, children, lovers,
ways, unspeakable mysteries, and menacing or pathetic appar and emplqyees, the reader may examine typical passages in
i'51°"$- TYPi°a]-17, the Castle of Udolpho (though relativel an hevs gong;-ass, Lewis's The Monk, Bonhote's Bung-39 Castle’
habitable, as fictitious castles go) has "towers, crowned b ROE stanhope's The Siege of Kenilworth, respectively. Hafy
over—hanging turrets, embattled, where, instead of banners, an Radcliffgs one—handed villain has the unusual_and mov-
now waved long grasses and plants, that had taken root amon énn Q1-1&1-we of seeing his own lost member "rott1ng in
the mouldering stones/'2 Like other Gothic castles, it is mg 311251; "3 The more famous and conservative Ann RadCliffe
surrounded/not by gardens but by dark and possibly hostile the lies as one of Udolph0's mysteries a waxen image of
f°l'9$I$- The ruined world of_Gothic fiction must imply that suppefaction complete with vermin, »/The point of all this
something better once existed.‘ Indeed, a nmnber of novels Pug, circumstance is that death is a peculiar, even dis-
(e.g. , Sleath's Orphan of the Rhine, Stanhope's The Cor- WC-Jn Zishing, characteristic of the fallen world. Death isd
55-iI'S Bride, G0dwin's St. Leon, Moore's Grasville Abbey, C;-iaps the most striking difference between the Edenic an
Ball's The Black Robber, and Montague's The Demon of Sicily) Phe blighted worlds, and Gothic fiction has always at hand
contain scenes that emphasize the process of desolation by tome memento mori to remind us which World We are in"
bringing their characters home to unexpected revelations of S The isolation of the prota8°“ist is a“°ther Ptincipél
1°55 and neglect testimony to the fallen nature of the Gothic world and is
A related circumstance that suggests the post—lapsarian 1-obably next to the setting» the besbknown characteris-
is the curious sunlessness of the novels. The obvious use 51¢ of Gothic fiction. Gothic heroes and heroines are On
of the twilight and nocturnal scenes and of the shadowy or their own, stumbling alone, sometimes in foreign countries,
pitch—black halls and tunnels and forests is to establish through appalling complexities of decision and action».
an atmosphere in which any surprise may plausibly occur and obliged to find their own solutions or go \"1de‘-:3 .35/Vra11Be'
anxieties about the unknown may be aroused. But conceivably men; from 311 family ties is their normal cond:|.tl°E' _1“'h
the darkness of the novels, especially in conjunction with deed it would be nearly impossible for protagonists 111 '1 9
the signs of ruin, also suggests a world from which the bQ5Q|;5 of their families to get into the scrapes Common t°
light, with all its possible implications and symbolic val- \G°thic figcion.
ues, has been withdrawn or in which it has been extinguished. Qccagignally isolation is volunta‘-'Y> 55 when 3 hero goes
As for the natural world_ in general, though the pros— off on some kind of mission, or Pefhalls 5i“‘P1Y 'fakes a trip
pects are often magnificent and melancholy in the Romantic More often, it is involuntary, 35 when the her°n_‘e (e'g']; d_
tradition, passages from Gothic fiction frequently suggest a Isabel in Green's Abbot of Montserrat, Rosaline in 14211:? 3
nature infected with insinuations‘ of hostility; To cite two C1iffe'S Manfroné, Ellena in Ann Rad<1liffe'5 2"‘? Italian)
°°nSPi<='-l°\1$ 911311113198, Lewis in The Monk describes the moun— or sometimes the hero (e.g., St. Leon in Godwin s St: I-egg:
taintop from which Satan will later hurl Ambrosio to his Leonard in Palmer's The Mystery of the Black Tower) 15 kl -
degth as a place altogether inhospitable to man, and for Ann mapped P1-Q¢agoniStS are frequently °1£Ph~‘1I\$: °r the: Lrg
- I ~— e — Y  ;
5? €tl1:fl€er:nE::ly, hi the Mgstenes of Udolpbol the beauties foundlnlgs or adwtedgibeir fully or f Otranto Theodore
Y e are m aire b such reminders of mor \’ ' ole's The Castle 0 i I
as memorial crosses ang a gibbzt, while natural featuﬁziiaze  :rZoh;e::igna1 of Valombre, Edmund_in'§eeE_
seen in terms of their potential as ambush. ihe *y
The very “on.-°n °f mortal“? (35 ab°Ve¢ and 1\llPlicit m es or nunnerT§_S—_T;8- , Agnes in Lewls S The 3°51/"
in the ruined castles) also testifies to the nature of the B_é$n§’5Tn’[%  Th§3e@h‘6fT3"§i1?  9:
Gothic world. Certainly the novels deal with death — sudden inlélungarily, where they may be further isolated by_t/e
death, violent death, tragic death, death as punishment for l ' hostility of the refigious conmxunit)’ (9-Bw Haﬂﬁfaa 1“ Mat-
villainy. This in itself would scarcely be worth noting, as \E‘?‘H<Hm6t'E_Ehe Wanderer). On other occasions they I113)’
one might take it for granted in novels so highly colored. b Y the Inquisition (e'g" Sn
amaqmm mmmoosmmmoo

Leon in Godwin's 51: mo . .
1 ft . n’ Amb1'°$1° 1n Lewis's The Monk) or fears of our nature."" Characters allude on numerous occa-
E to waste aw ,
Ethelwina, Verezii’  :::§;og:ei1g§’ Ethelwina in Curties's sions to their fear of the unknown and demonstrate repeated-
sometimes Suppose themselves to b Yfs zastz-ozzl), where they 1y a feeling that something is likely to jump them at an)’
tors and all the world -besides in Olrgotten by their eap- moment, and has probably been stalking them all along. The
protagonist almost never finds-him ifort, the one place the novelists sometimes emphasize that such fears are vague and
mankind, according to some rem iO$¢ is at home. (Like undirected, but more often provide them a focus in a number
stranger; his home is always soiemus views. he is just a of more eXPlicit menaces, Such as ghosts, the Inquisition,
add the reflection that his lifel ere elsej) And one might apparently omniscient spies; these menaces share the charac-
Skin is capped by the even greategng 15°]-3C1On in his own teristics of stealth, apparent or actual invisibility, and
The Wanderer, though he is de isolation of the grave. the ability to apprehend the victim at any moment and to in-
qu-eatened with it, is the epitOmPF zed of death rather than vade him in what he thought his safest strongholds.
nist, and his state is often ex 1? Q the Solitary ]>l‘Otag0- Not only do the novels present an image of the fallen
Maturin's Melmoth in Melmoth th: Pic tly (as in the case of world, but their plots are much concerned with the process
in Salathiel, and other Wanderin indexer’ Cr°1Y's Salathiel of falling, The tribulations of the protagonists have fre-
plicitly (as for St Leon or Algamewsé and i~1t'the least im— quently to do with temptation, flattery, deceit, and a sub-
Te'"PtEf) El species of Divine Punishgt In Green s Alibeg the sequent lapse from virtue.’ The agents of temptation are
8 perpetual exile, both homeless andeni. H? ma)’ be seen as various, but may generally be classified as demons, villains,
contains no other creature of his k_ 3 ‘me l-H 3 world that and illicit desires. Genuinely demonic tempters are not un-
ral nor quite supernatural he is 1n1' Neither quite natu- common in the more spectacular fiction. They EISSUEE a vari-
who is alienated bath fr°m>the b ana ogous to fallen man, ety of forms: for instance, Green's demon in The Abbot of
fear him» and from pure Spirits asst“ "h1¢1'l.have learned ta Montserrat, "half brute, half serpent,"5 always begins its
all the limitations that mortalit ecause he is mortal, with amlearances as a Patch of yellow light, impervious to rain,
C00, that the B'L'Cl'1etyp3]_ wander Y lmplies. One might note, and increases its wattage as its victim participates in
er, Cain is the fir t il' Dacre‘s Zofloya (in Zofloga) begins as a Moorish ser-
born into a fallen world. ’ S man ev ,
The Gothi I vant and becomes more beautiful with his victim's wicked
C Prota o ' t .
/f — g [us S dominant reactnms _ guilt and deeds, until he reveals his true ugliness at the moment of
I .
ear so erm
discuss thgm a:a::P:::$ng¥e€liet::Et?ﬂe is half_tempted to her destruction; Lewis's demon, in The Monk, comes disguised
crucial to tone and pertinent be tﬂlngl Certamly HWY are as a beautiful woman and perpetrates a most astounding and
world. Guilt is personified in resilnatufe of the Gothic subtle complexity of deceptions; Montague's demon in The
stricken ghosts (e.g., Viseensio in Mess and,c°nscien¢e' Demon of Sicily is described as a mixture of angelic and
Sicily, Ditmar in "The Family Portr ionﬁague 5 The Demon of infernal (reflected perhaps in an accompanying woodcut that
Dead) and in ghosts which like Ethalt? fl'0m Tales of the shows him with wings and a mustache) but works through a
in Curties's Ethelwina, 01,- Edmund‘ e "111-'-1 s murdered father rather crude if occasionally supernatural machinery of
glish Baron, or Arie“ in Green's Aigzrents in The Old En— erotic dreams, door keys, and such.
111 C0nnect1Qn with someone e1se,S til: ﬁfe Tempfer, walk More often than demons, Gothic fiction provides vil-
preoccupation’ one way and anotherg w_  dThere‘1s also much lains, described in uncompromisingly demonic terms. Fiend
as the fruit of guilty deeds. Villailt amnatlon and ruin is a predictably frequent term of disapprobation, but both
agony (E-B-. Le0P0ld in Ethelwina 1) us eXP1re in mental ‘V serpent and subtle have a high level of incidence as well.
Egbert"), raving about their vi tin e "eld°1'l in Drake's "Sir ‘X Male villains, in particular, tend to look a little satanic.
who will carry them off to hellc Azdand akout the devils §everaf, like Holford's Wolfstein ’(in Warbeck of Wolfstefn)
guilt—ridden figure of the Wander ' agaln, there is the and Maturin's Schemoli (in Fatal Revenge), take pains to
ing for his Particular misdeed er, who can never St°P Pay- persuade their intended victims that they are indeed super-
AS for fear, it seems to be; the ' _ natural. Many of than are beset by Satan's own flaw, un-
Besides fearing — to name only a f novels Prmcipal end- governable pride. Nearly all of them relish their wicked
napping, robbery, seduction pass].-:w tlgings — murder, kid- work.
bereavement, and falling 11-.20 it n’ amlation, bankruptcy, ‘ Temptations, like their agents, come in many forms —
Gothic world are clearly plagugd 1?, t:e inhabitants of the murder (parricide is popular), renunciation of God, capito-
name, perhaps what Mary Shglle y C e fﬁar that ha? 11° lation to lust and passion, gaming and fiscal irresponsibil-
y means by the mystel-'1°'-I5 ity, Qnd a host of lesser sins like suspicion, rudeness to
CB1-Bu:m6m,”u._‘”
w<amuo7ao¢nu=m

parents, and weakness of character. Authors make clear that Vail and the boys, supposing their persecutor to be OM11?-
all of these lead to disaster. Characters understandably agent give themselves up to his direction. Or consider
remark that Satan seems to have been let loose to prey among Lewisls The Monk, which demonstrates deception by the senses
them‘ at its most dangerous. Although Ambrosio's mind is warped
The task of the powers of darkness is assisted by some by pride and passion, his visual equipment is normal; yet
human weaknesses that ate contingent on the fallen state. it perceives only the disguise and not the demon hidden un-
Me“ is the ViCtim, first, of corrupted appetites and, sec— derneath. He is taken in, to his eternal damnation, hY Ma“
ond, of imperfect faculties.) The novelists‘ views evidently tilda's disguise as a y0\m8 men» by e ‘lem°“'S disguise as
coincide in this respect with those of Coleridge, who writes Matilda, by Matilda's resemblance to the Virgin Mary's Pie‘
to his brother George in 1798, "I believe most steadfastly ture by Satan's appearance as a haﬂdseme boy, and by the
in original Sin; that from our mothers’ wombs our understand— conclusions based on these false perceptions.
ings are darkened; and even when our unders andizn are - A few additional details are particularly remlniscent
the Light, that our organization is ld'e>p1F§<r/e‘§’f'an<ig“gur vo%i":' I of the Edenic myth. Gardens (and related m3h'med° $°e“eS °f
tions imperfect."5 This seems a succinct statement of what luxury as above), Oh the °<1¢e$l<>11S when they de 3PPee1'- are
the novels demonstrate —\that the condition of being fallen 1ikely,to be the scenes of temptation. In Maturin's Melmoth
renders one peculiarly vulnerable to snares and deceptions the Wanderer, II1I!!l8lee'$ lelend P3734159, 1'-115° vhich Melmoth
which should at all costs be resisted.  insinuates his horrid knowledgeability, is an obvious reP‘-“e-
Thi Pl-'l!El-P31 Passion that undoes Gothic heroes and he- sentation of Eden, with Immalee as the innocent Eve. Other
Qines is predictaﬂy lust, though there are instances of 7 conspicuous garden—temptations can be found in The Monk
anairﬂ-IVHTTEE. occult curiosities, and even ilnttcng, is (Matilda reveals her identity, and her bosom. in the abbey
well as more enefil sensuali . Tspecially for novelists garden and Ambrosio is bitten by the snake) and in Dacre's
who wish to avoid the more lurid effects achieved by demons The Libertine (where Angele the libertine ﬁlters the bucolic
and villains, passions play the role of demonic agents, pa;-adi e designed to keep Gabrielle innocent, and seduces X
treacherously internal. When Roche's Clermont asks a monk her). CThe preternatural and Edenic innocence of the average.
whether evil spirits really are let loose to tpt men to Gothic heroine has been burlesqued too often to require
destruction, the holy man replies, "<tis not the ministers elaboration.')
of darkness, but their own impetuous passions which hurry Disaster 111 the novels, as in Eden, Strikes SW1-filly and
\ r them to destruction."7) Consequently we often discover relentlessly and is irreversible. Much is made of this; the
,* that 'Ie"lPters have set elaborate traps, bowers of insidious plots are predictably (full of murder, sudden death, Id-flee?"
/ bliss, baited with pleasures which arouse as many sensations ping, and so on.>P They are full, as Well, ef Phil°$°Phi=lh8
as possible. In Lathom's Astonishment, for example, a vir— on the sudden and evil turns of fate and are particularly
tuous young man is tpted by an older woman whose garden is given to imagery involving falling into pits and off the
heavily perfumed with the scent of orange trees, roses, he- edges of precipices. Related to the notion of pits opening
liotrope, etc., whose table is set with cakes, ices, and beneath one's feet, and even more pertinent t0 temptation,
Wines» and who hopefully inquires whether he likes music." is the vortex image that accompanies the assertion that one
The success of the tpters often depends to some de— false step can lead straight to endless ruin. Lust is of
gfee OB their ability to delude the victims. Sometimes the course an especially dangerous sin in this respect. In
delusion is intellectual, as in the inculcation of what the Hamilton's Montalva alone, three quite separate girls fall
novels call False Philosophy (usually some poisonous brand victim to this evil passion, succumbing in weak moments to
of libertinism). More interestingly, the delusion may be what the novelists call "guilty transports." "One unguarded
physical — the innocent and smiling face of a villain, the moment," explains one of the sinners, "plunged us both into
illusions of sorcery, the false appearance of a demon; the guilt and robbed me of peace for ever."9 Dacre warns her
novels display a marked preoccupation with the unreliability readegs "The temptation to evil once admitted, it is no
of the human senses. In Maturin's Fatal Revenge, for in- longer easy to repel its insidious advances; a dreaded step
stance, the sinister confessor Schemoli, pretending to be once taken, another quickly follows; and the wretched vicI0\)
a specter, plays on the somewhat occult expectations of the tin of error seldom awakens, till repentance is in vain." l
two Montorio brothers, the more susceptible of whom is at DaQ[‘e'S casual assumption that repentance is in vain is a
°1'le P°lT"1 falsely Pefsuaded that he has Seen the 601158580!‘ good illustration of the oddly hopeless tone one perceives
turn into a skeleton. Schemoli's deceptions ultimately pre— in the Gothic world; man has a soul to lose, but "° °X'Peet-=1‘
moummsmanxn wmwwgmmoom

é The One—Handed Honk (Lon-
tion of mercy or possible atonement. Innocence occasionally 3_ Hary Ann Radcliffe, Manfron £83?
resists the snares laid against it and wins throu h to a 1839), p. 94. First edition, -
happy ending. But the
8 don, ' Th Modern Prometheus (T°1'°"'
evadable snares are usually rather 4- H31’? 5he11eY' Fra"ke"?te:‘n't€zi_1',d efution, 1331,
crude and superficial ones. The heroine may triumph over 120- 1955)» P‘ ix’ Reprint 0 t 2 tsert-it or The P001
5 William Child Green» The lbw“ ‘*5 "°" ' '
Z3e§¥§.T§i§§§§a§§$“§§f¥§.§§‘§§Z..§“§l"§iv§§ §}‘°h§i,§‘f'“e5L§f of Hg»; §_‘;gg“;;;,1§’2li,i;§§l;  of s...,...1 mm Coleridge,
confronted with a tempter, natural or supernatural, of any ed_ 5;;-1aLes1ie Griggs (Oxford, 1956), 11395-_ volumes (L°n_
psychological ingenuity, however, the frail defense Of the 7_ Regina Maria Roche, Cletmont. A T-319 1" Fm“
darkened understanding is exceedingl likel to ive wa . 1953)-, . 294. First edition, 1798.
y y g y d°“‘ P - hm 1; A Romance of a Century 5§°
In addition to the evidence of deprivations, ruins, 8. Francis  Qféﬂnlliiric édidon’ 18o2_
failures, and hazards,(one pleasant circumstance helps to (London, 1521)’ ' ’ ' 1 of Guilt. A Tale
9 A n Mary Hamilton, Montalva, O1‘, Anna s
identify the Gothic world as fallen£The recognition and ' “ 806) 2_121
reunion scenes that Provide resoluti s to a number of the (L°“d8“’C¢ar1°€ce'Dac;e’ The Libel-tine (London, 1397)’ 1:72‘
novels, especially thé’i{1iaé'r ones_,“§re not peculiar to the 1 '
genre, but the search for one's origins, identity, and fam-
ily connections is certainly one of the commonest quests in
Gothic fiction and may
be seen as an attempt to impose order
upon a chaotic environment? The moment of discovery consti-
tutes, with the reunion of overs, the greatest and indeed
the only notable source of joy to he found in the Gothic
world , perhaps because
it promises an escape from the world
as the poor wanderer has known it. The Gothic world, like
the fallen world, is blighted, a place of danger, sorrow,
and exile, in which the protagonist's only salvation is a
rediscovery of and reunion with the father or the beloved.
In certain of the novels, however, the discovery of one's
ties means the discovery of sin (e.g., incest, matricide)
and leads not to joy but to despair.
The ambience of despair and degeneration that charac-
terizes Gothic fiction, though it finds its widest and most
concentrated expression in that form, also runs suggestively
in one way and another
through much of the literature of the
period. Surely we must stop dismissing Gothic fiction as
a frivolous manifestation of the Romantic fascination with
the supernatural, the mysterious, the medieval, and see the
genre as a principal part of Romanticism's darker side. Al-
though the novels assert only intermittently a qualitative
claim to the company of Coleridge or Keats, by sheer bulk
and wealth of detail Gothic fiction provides much the most
comprehensive literary
expression of the present, dark, and
fallen world against which Romanticism must measure the
brightness ,of its Edens and New Jerusalems.
Notes
1. Robert Kiely, The Romantic Novel in England (Cambridge, Mass.,
1912), p. 191.
2. Ann Radcliffe, The Mysteries of Udolpbo (Oxford, 1970), p.
227. First edition, 17914.
mwwmlﬂmwmm M-====l1“’“‘°°°’

